
Title: The God in the Car
                           THE GOD IN THE CAR

                               _A NOVEL_


                                   BY
                              ANTHONY HOPE
                  AUTHOR OF THE PRISONER OF ZENDA, ETC.


                             [Illustration]


                                NEW YORK
                        D. APPLETON AND COMPANY
                                  1894




                            COPYRIGHT, 1894.

                      BY D. APPLETON AND COMPANY.




                               CONTENTS.


    CHAPTER                                                     PAGE

       I.--AN INSOLENT MEMORY                                      1

      II.--THE COINING OF A NICKNAME                              14

     III.--MRS. DENNISON'S ORDERS                                 26

      IV.--TWO YOUNG GENTLEMEN                                    39

       V.--A TELEGRAM TO FRANKFORT                                52

      VI.--WHOSE SHALL IT BE?                                     66

     VII.--AN ATTEMPT TO STOP THE WHEELS                          81

    VIII.--CONVERTS AND HERETICS                                  96

      IX.--AN OPPRESSIVE ATMOSPHERE                              108

       X.--A LADY'S BIT OF WORK                                  120

      XI.--AGAINST HIS COMING                                    134

     XII.--IT CAN WAIT                                           148

    XIII.--A SPASM OF PENITENCE                                  160

     XIV.--THE THING OR THE MAN                                  173

      XV.--THE WORK OF A WEEK                                    185

     XVI.--THE LAST BARRIERS                                     200

    XVII.--A SOUND IN THE NIGHT                                  217

   XVIII.--ON THE MATTER OF A RAILWAY                            231

     XIX.--PAST PRAYING FOR                                      248

      XX.--THE BARON'S CONTRIBUTION                              258

     XXI.--A JOINT IN HIS ARMOUR                                 271

    XXII.--A TOAST IN CHAMPAGNE                                  287

   XXIII.--THE CUTTING OF THE KNOT                               304

    XXIV.--THE RETURN OF A FRIEND                                317

     XXV.--THE MOVING CAR                                        332




                          THE GOD IN THE CAR.


                               CHAPTER I.

                          AN INSOLENT MEMORY.


"I'm so blind," said Miss Ferrars plaintively. "Where are my glasses?"

"What do you want to see?" asked Lord Semingham.

"The man in the corner, talking to Mr. Loring."

"Oh, you won't know him even with the glasses. He's the sort of man you
must be introduced to three times before there's any chance of a
permanent impression."

"You seem to recognise him."

"I know him in business. We are, or rather are going to be,
fellow-directors of a company."

"Oh, then I shall see you in the dock together some day."

"What touching faith in the public prosecutor! Does nothing shake your
optimism?"

"Perhaps your witticisms."

"Peace, peace!"

"Well, who is he?"

"He was once," observed Lord Semingham, as though stating a curious
fact, "in a Government. His name is Foster Belford, and he is still
asked to the State Concerts."

"I knew I knew him! Why, Harry Dennison thinks great things of him!"

"It is possible."

"And he, not to be behindhand in politeness, thinks greater of Maggie
Dennison."

"His task is the easier."

"And you and he are going to have the effrontery to ask shareholders to
trust their money to you?"

"Oh, it isn't us; it's Ruston."

"Mr. Ruston? I've heard of him."

"You very rarely admit that about anybody."

"Moreover, I've met him."

"He's quite coming to the front, of late, I know."

"Is there any positive harm in being in the fashion? I like now and then
to talk to the people one is obliged to talk about."

"Go on," said Lord Semingham, urbanely.

"But, my dear Lord Semingham----"

"Hush! Keep the truth from me, like a kind woman. Ah! here comes Tom
Loring----How are you, Loring? Where's Dennison?"

"At the House. I ought to be there, too."

"Why, of course. The place of a private secretary is by the side of----"

"His chief's wife. We all know that," interposed Adela Ferrars.

"When you grow old, you'll be sorry for all the wicked things you've
said," observed Loring.

"Well, there'll be nothing else to do. Where are you going, Lord
Semingham?"

"Home."

"Why?"

"Because I've done my duty. Oh, but here's Dennison, and I want a word
with him."

Lord Semingham passed on, leaving the other two together.

"Has Harry Dennison been speaking to-day?" asked Miss Ferrars.

"Well, he had something prepared."

"He had something! You know you write them."

Mr. Loring frowned.

"Yes, and I know we aren't allowed to say so," pursued Adela.

"It's neither just nor kind to Dennison."

Miss Ferrars looked at him, her brows slightly raised.

"And you are both just and kind, really," he added.

"And you, Mr. Loring, are a wonderful man. You're not ashamed to be
serious! Oh, yes, I've annoyed--you're quite right. I was--whatever I
was--on the ninth of last March, and I think I'm too old to be
lectured."

Tom Loring laughed, and, an instant later, Adela followed suit.

"I suppose it was horrid of me," she said. "Can't we turn it round and
consider it as a compliment to you?"

Tom looked doubtful, but, before he could answer, Adela cried:

"Oh, here's Evan Haselden, and--yes--it's Mr. Ruston with him?"

As the two men entered, Mrs. Dennison rose from her chair. She was a
tall woman; her years fell one or two short of thirty. She was not a
beauty, but her broad brow and expressive features, joined to a certain
subdued dignity of manner and much grace of movement, made her
conspicuous among the women in her drawing-room. Young Evan Haselden
seemed to appreciate her, for he bowed his glossy curly head, and shook
hands in a way that almost turned the greeting into a deferentially
distant caress. Mrs. Dennison acknowledged his hinted homage with a
bright smile, and turned to Ruston.

"At last!" she said, with another smile. "The first time after--how many
years?"

"Eight, I believe," he answered.

"Oh, you're terribly definite. And what have you been doing with
yourself?"

He shrugged his square shoulders, and she did not press her question,
but let her eyes wander over him.

"Well?" he asked.

"Oh--improved. And I?"

Suddenly Ruston laughed.

"Last time we met," he said, "you swore you'd never speak to me again."

"I'd quite forgotten my fearful threat."

He looked straight in her face for a moment, as he asked--

"And the cause of it?"

Mrs. Dennison coloured.

"Yes, quite," she answered; and conscious that her words carried no
conviction to him, she added hastily, "Go and speak to Harry. There he
is."

Ruston obeyed her, and being left for a moment alone, she sat down on
the chair placed ready near the door for her short intervals of rest.
There was a slight pucker on her brow. The sight of Ruston and his
question stirred in her thoughts, which were never long dormant, and
which his coming woke into sudden activity. She had not anticipated that
he would venture to recall to her that incident--at least, not at
once--in the first instant of meeting, at such a time and such a place.
But as he had, she found herself yielding to the reminiscence he
induced. Forgotten the cause of her anger with him? For the first two or
three years of her married life, she would have answered, "Yes, I have
forgotten it." Then had come a period when now and again it recurred to
her, not for his sake or its own, but as a summary of her stifled
feeling; and during that period she had resolutely struggled not to
remember it. Of late that struggle had ceased, and the thing lay a
perpetual background to her thoughts: when there was nothing else to
think about, when the stage of her mind was empty of moving figures, it
snatched at the chance of prominence, and thus became a recurrent
consciousness from which her interests and her occupations could not
permanently rescue her. For example, here she was thinking of it in the
very midst of her party. Yet this persistence of memory seemed
impertinent, unreasonable, almost insolent. For, as she told herself,
finding it necessary to tell herself more and more often, her husband
was still all that he had been when he had won her heart--good-looking,
good-tempered, infinitely kind and devoted. When she married she had
triumphed confidently in these qualities; and the unanimous cry of
surprised congratulations at the match she was making had confirmed her
own joy and exultation in it. It had been a great match; and yet, beyond
all question, also a love match.

But now the chorus of wondering applause was forgotten, and there
remained only the one voice which had been raised to break the harmony
of approbation--a voice that nobody, herself least of all, had listened
to then. How should it be listened to? It came from a nobody--a young
man of no account, whose opinion none cared to ask; whose judgment, had
it been worth anything in itself, lay under suspicion of being biassed
by jealousy. Willie Ruston had never declared himself her suitor; yet
(she clung hard to this) he would not have said what he did had not the
chagrin of a defeated rival inspired him; and a defeated rival, as
everybody knows, will say anything. Certainly she had been right not to
listen, and was wrong to remember. To this she had often made up her
mind, and to this she returned now as she sat watching her husband and
Willie Ruston, forgetful of all the chattering crowd beside.

As to what it was she resolved not to remember, and did remember, it was
just one sentence--his only comment on the news of her engagement, his
only hint of any opinion or feeling about it. It was short, sharp,
decisive, and, as his judgments were, even in the days when he, alone of
all the world, held them of any moment, absolutely confident; it was
also, she had felt on hearing it, utterly untrue, unjust, and
ungenerous. It had rung out like a pistol-shot, "Maggie, you're marrying
a fool," and then a snap of tight-fitting lips, a glance of scornful
eyes, and a quick, unhesitating stride away that hardly waited for a
contemptuous smile at her angry cry, "I'll never speak to you again."
She had been in a fury of wrath--she had a power of wrath--that a plain,
awkward, penniless, and obscure youth--one whom she sometimes disliked
for his arrogance, and sometimes derided for his self-confidence--should
dare to say such a thing about her Harry, whom she was so proud to love,
and so proud to have won. It was indeed an insolent memory that flung
the thing again and again in her teeth.

The party began to melt away. The first good-bye roused Mrs. Dennison
from her enveloping reverie. Lady Valentine, from whom it came, lingered
for a gush of voluble confidences about the charm of the house, and the
people, and the smart little band that played softly in an alcove, and
what not; her daughter stood by, learning, it is to be hoped, how it is
meet to behave in society, and scanning Evan Haselden's trim figure with
wary, critical glances, alert to turn aside if he should glance her way.
Mrs. Dennison returned the ball of civility, and, released by several
more departures, joined Adela Ferrars. Adela stood facing Haselden and
Tom Loring, who were arm-in-arm. At the other end of the room Harry
Dennison and Ruston were still in conversation.

"These _men_, Maggie," began Adela--and it seemed a mere caprice of
pronunciation, that the word did not shape itself into "monkeys"--"are
the absurdest creatures. They say I'm not fit to take part in politics!
And why?"

Mrs. Dennison shook her head, and smiled.

"Because, if you please, I'm too emotional. Emotional, indeed! And I
can't generalise! Oh, couldn't I generalise about men!"

"Women can never say 'No,'" observed Evan Haselden, not in the least as
if he were repeating a commonplace.

"You'll find you're wrong when you grow up," retorted Adela.

"I doubt that," said Mrs. Dennison, with the kindest of smiles.

"Maggie, you spoil the boy. Isn't it enough that he should have gone
straight from the fourth form--where, I suppose, he learnt to
generalise----"

"At any rate, not to be emotional," murmured Loring.

"Into Parliament, without having his head turned by----"

"You'd better go, Evan," suggested Loring in a warning tone.

"I shall go too," announced Adela.

"I'm walking your way," said Evan, who seemed to bear no malice.

"How delightful!"

"You don't object?"

"Not the least. I'm driving."

"A mere schoolboy score!"

"How stupid of me! You haven't had time to forget them."

"Oh, take her away," said Mrs. Dennison, and they disappeared in a fire
of retorts, happy, or happy enough for happy people, and probably Evan
drove with the lady after all.

Mrs. Dennison walked towards where her husband and Ruston sat on a sofa
in talk.

"What are you two conspiring about?" she asked.

"Ruston had something to say to me about business."

"What, already?"

"Oh, we've met in the city, Mrs. Dennison," explained Ruston, with a
confidential nod to Harry.

"And that was the object of your appearance here to-day? I was
flattering my party, it seems."

"No. I didn't expect to find your husband. I thought he would be at the
House."

"Ah, Harry, how did the speech go?"

"Oh, really pretty well, I think," answered Harry Dennison, with a
contented air. "I got nearly half through before we were counted out."

A very faint smile showed on his wife's face.

"So you were counted out?" she asked.

"Yes, or I shouldn't be here."

"You see, I am acquitted, Mrs. Dennison. Only an accident brought him
here."

"An accident impossible to foresee," she acquiesced, with the slightest
trace of bitterness--so slight that her husband did not notice it.

Ruston rose.

"Well, you'd better talk to Semingham about it," he remarked to Harry
Dennison; "he's one of us, you know."

"Yes, I will. And I'll just get you that pamphlet of mine; you can put
it in your pocket."

He ran out of the room to fetch what he promised. Mrs. Dennison, still
faintly smiling, held out her hand to Ruston.

"It's been very pleasant to see you again," she said graciously. "I hope
it won't be eight years before our next meeting."

"Oh, no; you see I'm floating now."

"Floating?" she repeated, with a smile of enquiry.

"Yes; on the surface. I've been in the depths till very lately, and
there one meets no good society."

"Ah! You've had a struggle?"

"Yes," he answered, laughing; "you may call it a bit of a struggle."

She looked at him with grave curious eyes.

"And you are not married?" she asked abruptly.

"No, I'm glad to say."

"Why glad, Mr. Ruston? Some people like being married."

"Oh, I don't claim to be above it, Mrs. Dennison," he answered with a
laugh, "but a wife would have been a great hindrance to me all these
years."

There was a simple and _bona fide_ air about his statement; it was not
raillery; and Mrs. Dennison laughed in her turn.

"Oh, how like you!" she murmured.

Mr. Ruston, with a passing gleam of surprise at her merriment, bade her
a very unemotional farewell, and left her. She sat down and waited idly
for her husband's return. Presently he came in. He had caught Ruston in
the hall, delivered his pamphlet, and was whistling cheerfully. He took
a chair near his wife.

"Rum chap that!" he said. "But he's got a good deal of stuff in him;"
and he resumed his lively tune.

The tune annoyed Mrs. Dennison. To suffer whistling without visible
offence was one of her daily trials. Harry's emotions and reflections
were prone to express themselves through that medium.

"I didn't do half-badly, to-day," said Harry, breaking off again. "Old
Tom had got it all splendidly in shape for me--by Jove, I don't know
what I should do without Tom--and I think I put it pretty well. But, of
course, it's a subject that doesn't catch on with everybody."

It was the dullest subject in the world; it was also, in all likelihood,
one of the most unimportant; and dull subjects are so seldom unimportant
that the perversity of the combination moved Maggie Dennison to a
wondering pity. She rose and came behind the chair where her husband
sat. Leaning over the back, she rested her elbows on his shoulders, and
lightly clasped her hands round his neck. He stopped his whistle, which
had grown soft and contented, laughed, and kissed one of the encircling
hands, and she, bending lower, kissed him on the forehead as he turned
his face up to look at her.

"You poor dear old thing!" she said with a smile and a sigh.




                              CHAPTER II.

                       THE COINING OF A NICKNAME.


When it was no later than the middle of June, Adela Ferrars, having her
reputation to maintain, ventured to sum up the season. It was, she said,
a Ruston-cum-Violetta season. Violetta's doings and unexampled triumphs
have, perhaps luckily, no place here; her dancing was higher and her
songs more surpassing in another dimension than those of any performer
who had hitherto won the smiles of society; and young men who are
getting on in life still talk about her. Ruston's fame was less
widespread, but his appearance was an undeniable fact of the year. When
a man, the first five years of whose adult life have been spent on a
stool in a coal merchant's office, and the second five somewhere (an
absolutely vague somewhere) in Southern or Central Africa, comes before
the public, offering in one closed hand a new empire, or, to avoid all
exaggeration, at least a province, asking with the other opened hand for
three million pounds, the public is bound to afford him the tribute of
some curiosity. When he enlists in his scheme men of eminence like Mr.
Foster Belford, of rank like Lord Semingham, of great financial
resources like Dennison Sons & Company, he becomes one whom it is
expedient to bid to dinner and examine with scrutinising enquiry. He may
have a bag of gold for you; or you may enjoy the pleasure of exploding
his _prestige_; at least, you are timely and up-to-date, and none can
say that your house is a den of fogies, or yourself, in the language
made to express these things (for how otherwise should they get
themselves expressed?) on other than "the inner rail."

It chanced that Miss Ferrars arrived early at the Seminghams, and she
talked with her host on the hearth-rug, while Lady Semingham was
elaborately surveying her small but comely person in a mirror at the
other end of the long room. Lord Semingham was rather short and
rather stout; he hardly looked as if his ancestors had fought at
Hastings--perhaps they had not, though the peerage said they had. He
wore close-cut black whiskers, and the blue of his jowl witnessed a
suppressed beard of great vitality. His single eye-glass reflected
answering twinkles to Adela's _pince-nez_, and his mouth was puckered at
the world's constant entertainment; men said that he found his wife
alone a sufficient and inexhaustible amusement.

"The Heathers are coming," he said, "and Lady Val and Marjory, and young
Haselden, and Ruston."

"_Toujours_ Ruston," murmured Adela.

"And one or two more. What's wrong with Ruston? There is, my dear Adela,
no attitude more offensive than that of indifference to what the common
herd finds interesting."

"He's a fright," said Adela. "You'd spike yourself on that bristly beard
of his."

"If you happened to be near enough, you mean?--a danger my sex and our
national habits render remote. Bessie!"

Lady Semingham came towards them, with one last craning look at her own
back as she turned. She always left the neighbourhood of a mirror with
regret.

"Well?" she asked with a patient little sigh.

"Adela is abusing your friend Ruston."

"He's not my friend, Alfred. What's the matter, Adela?"

"I don't think I like him. He's hard."

"He's got a demon, you see," said Semingham. "For that matter we all
have, but his is a whopper."

"Oh, what's my demon?" cried Adela. Is not oneself always the most
interesting subject?

"Yours? Cleverness; He goads you into saying things one can't see the
meaning of."

"Thanks! And yours?"

"Grinning--so I grin at your things, though I don't understand 'em."

"And Bessie's?"

"Oh, forgive me. Leave us a quiet home."

"And now, Mr. Ruston's?"

"His is----"

But the door opened, and the guests, all arriving in a heap, just twenty
minutes late, flooded the room and drowned the topic. Another five
minutes passed, and people had begun furtively to count heads and wonder
whom they were waiting for, when Evan Haselden was announced. Hot on his
heels came Ruston, and the party was completed.

Mr. Otto Heather took Adela Ferrars in to dinner. Her heart sank as he
offered his arm. She had been heard to call him the silliest man in
Europe; on the other hand, his wife, and some half-dozen people besides,
thought him the cleverest in London.

"That man," he said, swallowing his soup and nodding his head towards
Ruston, "personifies all the hideous tendencies of the age--its
brutality, its commercialism, its selfishness, its----"

Miss Ferrars looked across the table. Ruston was seated at Lady
Semingham's left hand, and she was prattling to him in her sweet
indistinct little voice. Nothing in his appearance warranted Heather's
outburst, unless it were a sort of alert and almost defiant readiness,
smacking of a challenge to catch him napping.

"I'm not a mediævalist myself," she observed, and prepared to endure the
penalty of an _exposé_ of Heather's theories. During its progress, she
peered--for her near sight was no affectation--now and again at the
occasion of her sufferings. She had heard a good deal about
him--something from her host, something from Harry Dennison, more from
the paragraphists who had scented their prey, and gathered from the four
quarters of heaven (or wherever they dwelt) upon him. She knew about the
coal merchant's office, the impatient flight from it, and the rush over
the seas; there were stories of real naked want, where a bed and shelter
bounded for the moment all a life's aspirations. She summed him up as a
buccaneer modernised; and one does not expect buccaneers to be amiable,
while culture in them would be an incongruity. It was, on the whole, not
very surprising, she thought, that few people liked William Roger
Ruston--nor that many believed in him.

"Don't you agree with me?" asked Heather.

"Not in the least," said Adela at random.

The odds that he had been saying something foolish were very large.

"I thought you were such friends!" exclaimed Heather in surprise.

"Well, to confess, I was thinking of something else. Who do you mean?"

"Why, Mrs. Dennison. I was saying that her calm queenly manner----"

"Good gracious, Mr. Heather, don't call women 'queenly.' You're
like--what is it?--a 'dime novel.'"

If this comparison were meant to relieve her from the genius'
conversation for the rest of dinner, it was admirably conceived. He
turned his shoulder on her in undisguised dudgeon.

"And how's the great scheme?" asked somebody of Ruston.

"We hope to get the money," he said, turning for a moment from his
hostess. "And if we do that, we're all right."

"Everything's going on very well," called Semingham from the foot of the
table. "They've killed a missionary."

"How dreadful!" lisped his wife.

"Regrettable in itself, but the first step towards empire," explained
Semingham with a smile.

"It's to stop things of that kind that we are going there," Mr. Belford
pronounced; the speech was evidently meant to be repeated, and to rank
as authoritative.

"Of course," chuckled Semingham.

If he had been a shopman, he could not have resisted showing his
customers how the adulteration was done.

In spite of herself--for she strongly objected to being one of an
admiring crowd, and liked a personal _cachet_ on her emotions--Adela
felt pleasure when, after dinner, Ruston came straight to her and,
displacing Evan Haselden, sat down by her side. He assumed the position
with a business-like air, as though he meant to stay. She often, indeed
habitually, had two or three men round her, but to-night none contested
Ruston's exclusive possession; she fancied that the business-like air
had something to do with it. She had been taken possession of, she said
to herself, with a little impatience and yet a little pleasure also.

"You know everybody here, I suppose?" he asked. His tone cast a doubt on
the value of the knowledge.

"It's my tenth season," said Adela, with a laugh. "I stopped counting
them once, but there comes a time when one has to begin again."

He looked at her--critically, she thought--as he said,

"The ravages of time no longer to be ignored?"

"Well, the exaggerations of friends to be checked. Yes, I suppose I know
most of----"

She paused for a word.

"The gang," he suggested, leaning back and crossing his legs.

"Yes, we are a gang, and all on one chain. You're a recent captive,
though."

"Yes," he assented, "it's pretty new to me. A year ago I hadn't a dress
coat."

"The gods are giving you a second youth then."

"Well, I take it. I don't know that I have much to thank the gods for."

"They've been mostly against you, haven't they? However, what does that
matter, if you beat them?"

He did not disdain her compliment, but neither did he accept it. He
ignored it, and Adela, who paid very few compliments, was amused and
vexed.

"Perhaps," she added, "you think your victory still incomplete?"

This gained no better attention. Mr. Ruston seemed to be following his
own thoughts.

"It must be a curious thing," he remarked, "to be born to a place like
Semingham's."

"And to use it--or not to use it--like Lord Semingham?"

"Yes, I was thinking of that," he admitted.

"To be eminent requires some self-deception, doesn't it? Without that,
it would seem too absurd. I think Lord Semingham is overweighted with
humour." She paused and then--to show that she was not in awe of
him--she added,--"Now, I should say, you have very little."

"Very little, indeed, I should think," he agreed composedly.

"You're the only man I ever heard admit that of himself; we all say it
of one another."

"I know what I have and haven't got pretty well."

Adela was beginning to be more sure that she disliked him, but the topic
had its interest for her and she went on,

"Now I like to think I've got everything."

To her annoyance, the topic seemed to lose interest for him, just in
proportion as it gained interest for her. In fact, Mr. Ruston did not
apparently care to talk about what she liked or didn't like.

"Who's that pretty girl over there," he asked, "talking to young
Haselden?"

"Marjory Valentine," said Adela curtly.

"Oh! I think I should like to talk to her."

"Pray, don't let me prevent you," said Adela in very distant tones.

The man seemed to have no manners.

Mr. Ruston said nothing, but gave a short laugh. Adela was not
accustomed to be laughed at openly. Yet she felt defenceless; this
pachydermatous animal would be impervious to the pricks of her rapier.

"You're amused?" she asked sharply.

"Why were you in such a hurry to take offence? I didn't say I wanted to
go and talk to her now."

"It sounded like it."

"Oh, well, I'm very sorry," he conceded, still smiling, and obviously
thinking her very absurd.

She rose from her seat.

"Please do, though. She'll be going soon, and you mayn't get another
chance."

"Well, I will then," he answered simply, accompanying the remark with a
nod of approval for her sensible reminder. And he went at once.

She saw him touch Haselden on the shoulder, and make the young man
present him to Marjory. Ruston sat down and Haselden drifted, aimless
and forlorn, on a solitary passage along the length of the room.

Adela joined Lady Semingham.

"That's a dreadful man, Bessie," she said; "he's a regular Juggernaut."

She disturbed Lady Semingham in a moment of happiness; everybody had
been provided with conversation, and the hostess could sit in peaceful
silence, looking, and knowing that she looked, very dainty and pretty;
she liked that much better than talking.

"Who's what, dear?" she murmured.

"That man--Mr. Ruston. I say he's a Juggernaut. If you're in the way, he
just walks over you--and sometimes when you're not: for fun, I suppose."

"Alfred says he's very clever," observed Lady Semingham, in a tone that
evaded any personal responsibility for the truth of the statement.

"Well, I dislike him very much," declared Adela.

"We won't have him again when you're coming, dear," promised her friend
soothingly.

Adela looked at her, hesitated, opened her fan, shut it again, and
smiled.

"Oh, I didn't mean that, Bessie," she said with half a laugh. "Do,
please."

"But if you dislike him----"

"Why, my dear, doesn't one hate half the men one likes meeting--and all
the women!"

Lady Semingham smiled amiably. She did not care to think out what that
meant; it was Adela's way, just as it was her husband's way to laugh at
many things that seemed to her to afford no opening for mirth. But Adela
was not to escape. Semingham himself appeared suddenly at her elbow, and
observed,

"That's either nonsense or a truism, you know."

"Neither," said Adela with spirit; but her defence was interrupted by
Evan Haselden.

"I'm going," said he, and he looked out of temper. "I've got another
place to go to. And anyhow----"

"Well?"

"I'd like to be somewhere where that chap Ruston isn't for a little
while."

Adela glanced across. Ruston was still talking to Marjory Valentine.

"What can he find to say to her?" thought Adela.

"What the deuce she finds to talk about to that fellow, I can't think,"
pursued Evan, and he flung off to bid Lady Semingham good-night.

Adela caught her host's eye and laughed. Lord Semingham's eyes twinkled.

"It's a big province," he observed, "so there may be room for him--out
there."

"I," said Adela, with an air of affected modesty, "have ventured,
subject to your criticism, to dub him Juggernaut."

"H'm," said Semingham, "it's a little obvious, but not so bad for you."




                              CHAPTER III.

                         MRS. DENNISON'S ORDERS.


Next door to Mrs. Dennison's large house in Curzon Street there lived,
in a small house, a friend of hers, a certain Mrs. Cormack. She was a
Frenchwoman, who had been married to an Englishman, and was now his most
resigned widow. She did not pretend to herself, or to anybody else, that
Mr. Cormack's death had been a pure misfortune, and by virtue of her
past trials--perhaps, also, of her nationality--she was keenly awake to
the seamy side of matrimony. She would rhapsodise on the joys of an
ideal marriage, with a skilful hint of its rarity, and condemn
transgressors with a charitable reservation for insupportable miseries.
She was, she said, very romantic. Tom Loring, however (whose evidence
was tainted by an intense dislike of her), declared that _affaires du
coeur_ interested her only when one at least of the parties was lawfully
bound to a third person; when both were thus trammelled, the situation
was ideal. But the loves of those who were in a position to marry one
another, and had no particular reason for not following that legitimate
path to happiness, seemed to her (still according to Tom) dull,
uninspiring--all, in fact, that there was possible of English and
stupid. She hardly (Tom would go on, warming to his subject) believed in
them at all, and she was in the habit of regarding wedlock merely as a
condition precedent to its own violent dissolution. Whether this unhappy
mode of looking at the matter were due to her own peculiarities, or to
those of the late Mr. Cormack, or to those of her nation, Tom did not
pretend to say; he confined himself to denouncing it freely, and to
telling Mrs. Dennison that her next-door neighbour was in all respects a
most undesirable acquaintance; at which outbursts Mrs. Dennison would
smile.

Mrs. Dennison, coming out on to the balcony to see if her carriage were
in sight down the street, found her friend close to her elbow. Their
balconies adjoined, and friendship had led to a little gate being
substituted for the usual dwarf-wall of division. Tom Loring erected the
gate into an allegory of direful portent. Mrs. Cormack passed through
it, and laid an affectionate grasp on Maggie Dennison's arm.

"You're starting early," she remarked.

"I'm going a long way--right up to Hampstead. I've promised Harry to
call on some people there."

"Ah! Who?"

"Their name's Carlin. He knows Mr. Carlin in business. Mr. Carlin's a
friend of Mr. Ruston's."

"Oh, of Ruston's? I like that Ruston. He is interesting--inspiring."

"Is he?" said Mrs. Dennison, buttoning her glove. "You'd better marry
him, Berthe."

"Marry him? No, indeed. I think he would beat one."

"Is that being inspiring? I'm glad Harry's not inspiring."

"Oh, you know what I mean. He's a man who----"

Mrs. Cormack threw up her arms as though praying for the inspired word.
Mrs. Dennison did not wait for it.

"There's the carriage. Good-bye, dear," she said.

Mrs. Dennison started with a smile on her face. Berthe was so funny; she
was like a page out of a French novel. She loved anything not quite
respectable, and peopled the world with heroes of loose morals and
overpowering wills. She adored a dominating mind and lived in the
discovery of affinities. What nonsense it all was--so very remote from
the satisfactory humdrum of real life. One kept house, and gave dinners,
and made the children happy, and was fond of one's husband, and life
passed most----Here Mrs. Dennison suddenly yawned, and fell to hoping
that the Carlins would not be oppressively dull. She had been bored all
day long; the children had been fretful, and poor Harry was hurt and in
low spirits because of a cruel caricature in a comic paper, and Tom
Loring had scolded her for laughing at the caricature (it hit Harry off
so exactly), and nobody had come to see her, except a wretch who had
once been her kitchenmaid, and had come to terrible grief, and wanted to
be taken back, and of course couldn't be, and had to be sent away in
tears with a sovereign, and the tears were no use and the sovereign not
much.

The Carlins fortunately proved tolerably interesting in their own way.
Carlin was about fifty-five--an acute man of business, it seemed, and
possessed by an unwavering confidence in the abilities of Willie Ruston.
Mrs. Carlin was ten or fifteen years younger than her husband--a homely
little woman, with a swarm of children. Mrs. Dennison wondered how they
all fitted into the small house, but was told that it was larger by two
good rooms than their old dwelling in the country town, whence Willie
had summoned them to take a hand in his schemes. Willie had not insisted
on the coal business being altogether abandoned--as Mrs. Carlin said,
with a touch of timidity, it was well to have something to fall back
upon--but he required most of Carlin's time now, and the added work made
residence in London a necessity. In spite of Mr. Carlin's air of
hard-headedness, and his wife's prudent recognition of the business
aspect of life, they neither of them seemed to have a will of their own.
Willie--as they both called him--was the Providence, and the mixture of
reverence and familiarity presented her old acquaintance in a new light
to Maggie Dennison. Even the children prattled about "Willie," and their
mother's rebukes made "Mr. Ruston" no more than a strange and transitory
effort. Mrs. Dennison wondered what there was in the man--consulting her
own recollections of him in hope of enlightenment.

"He takes such broad views," said Carlin, and seemed to find this
characteristic the sufficient justification for his faith.

"I used to know him very well, you know," remarked Mrs. Dennison,
anxious to reach a more friendly footing, and realising that to connect
herself with Ruston offered the best chance of it. "I daresay he's
spoken of me--of Maggie Sherwood?"

They thought not, though Willie had been in Carlin's employ at the time
when he and Mrs. Dennison parted. She was even able, by comparison of
dates, to identify the holiday in which that scene had occurred and that
sentence been spoken; but he had never mentioned her name. She very much
doubted whether he had even thought of her. The fool and the fool's wife
had both been dismissed from his mind. She frowned impatiently. Why
should it be anything to her if they had?

There was a commotion among the children, starting from one who was
perched on the window-sill. Ruston himself was walking up to the door,
dressed in a light suit and a straw hat. After the greetings, while all
were busy getting him tea, he turned to Mrs. Dennison.

"This is very kind of you," he said in an undertone.

"My husband wished me to come," she replied.

He seemed in good spirits. He laughed, as he answered,

"Well, I didn't suppose you came to please me."

"You spoke as if you did," said she, still trying to resent his tone,
which she thought a better guide to the truth than his easy disclaimer.

"Why, you never did anything to please me!"

"Did you ever ask me?" she retorted.

He glanced at her for a moment, as he began to answer,

"Well, now, I don't believe I ever did; but I----"

Mrs. Carlin interposed with a proffered cup of tea, and he broke off.

"Thanks, Mrs. Carlin. I say, Carlin, it's going first-rate. Your
husband's help's simply invaluable, Mrs. Dennison."

"Harry?" she said, in a tone that she regretted a moment later, for
there was a passing gleam in Ruston's eye before he answered gravely,

"His firm carries great weight. Well, we're all in it here, sink or
swim; aren't we, Carlin?"

Carlin nodded emphatically, and his wife gave an anxious little sigh.

"And what's to be the end of it?" asked Mrs. Dennison.

"Ten per cent," said Carlin, with conviction. He could not have spoken
with more utter satisfaction of the millennium.

"The end?" echoed Ruston. "Oh, I don't know."

"At least he won't say," said Carlin admiringly.

Mrs. Dennison rose to go, engaging the Carlins to dine with her--an
invitation accepted with some nervousness, until the extension of it to
Ruston gave them a wing to come under. Ruston, with that directness of
his that shamed mere dexterity and superseded tact, bade Carlin stay
where he was, and himself escorted the visitor to her carriage. Half-way
down the garden walk she looked up at him and remarked,

"I expect you're the end."

His eyes had been wandering, but they came back sharply to hers.

"Then don't tell anybody," said he lightly.

She did not know whether what he said amounted to a confession or were
merely a jest. The next moment he was off at a tangent.

"I like your friend Miss Ferrars. She says a lot of sharp things, and
now and then something sensible."

"Now and then! Poor Adela!"

"Well, she doesn't often try. Besides, she's handsome."

"Oh, you've found time to notice that?"

"I notice that first," said Mr. Ruston.

They were at the carriage-door.

"I'm not dressed properly, so I mustn't drive with you," he said.

"Supposing that was the only reason," she replied, smiling, "would it
stop you?"

"Certainly."

"Why?"

"Because of other fools."

"I'll take you as far as Regent's Park. The other fools are on the other
side of that."

"I'll chance so far," and, waving his hand vaguely towards the house, he
got in. It did not seem to occur to him that there was any want of
ceremony in his farewell to the Carlins.

"I suppose," she said, "you think most of us fools?"

"I've been learning to think it less and to show it less still."

"You're not much changed, though."

"I've had some of my corners chipped off by collision with other hard
substances."

"Thank you for that 'other'!" cried Mrs. Dennison, with a little laugh.
"They must have been very hard ones."

"I didn't say that they weren't a little bit injured too."

"Poor things! I should think so."

"I have my human side."

"Generally the other side, isn't it?" she asked with a merry glance. The
talk had suddenly become very pleasant. He laughed, and stopped the
carriage. A sigh escaped from Mrs. Dennison.

"Next time," he said, "we'll talk about you, or Miss Ferrars, or that
little Miss Marjory Valentine, not about me. Good-bye," and he was gone
before she could say a word to him.

But it was natural that she should think a little about him. She had
not, she said to herself with a weary smile, too many interesting things
to think about, and she began to find him decidedly interesting; in
which fact again she found a certain strangeness and some material for
reflection, because she recollected very well that as a girl she had not
found him very attractive. Perhaps she demanded then more colouring of
romance than he had infused into their intercourse; she had indeed
suspected him of suppressed romance, but the suppression had been very
thorough, betraying itself only doubtfully here and there, as in his
judgment of her accepted suitor. Moreover, let his feelings then have
been what they might, he was not, she felt sure, the man to cherish a
fruitless love for eight or nine years, or to suffer any resurrection of
expired emotions on a renewed encounter with an old flame. He buried his
dead too deep for that; if they were in the way, she could fancy him
sometimes shovelling the earth over them and stamping it down without
looking too curiously whether life were actually extinct or only
flickering towards its extinction; if it were not quite gone at the
beginning of the gravedigger's work, it would be at the end, and the
result was the same. Nor did she suppose that ghosts gibbered or clanked
in the orderly trim mansions of his brain. In fact, she was to him a
more or less pleasant acquaintance, sandwiched in his mind between Adela
Ferrars and Marjory Valentine--with something attractive about her,
though she might lack the sparkle of the one and had been robbed of the
other's youthful freshness. This was the conclusion which she called
upon herself to draw as she drove back from Hampstead--the plain and
sensible conclusion. Yet, as she reached Curzon Street, there was a
smile on her face; and the conclusion was hardly such as to make her
smile--unless indeed she had added to it the reflection that it is ill
judging of things till they are finished. Her acquaintance with Willie
Ruston was not ended yet.

"Maggie, Maggie!" cried her husband through the open door of his study
as she passed up-stairs. "Great news! We're to go ahead. We settled it
at the meeting this morning."

Harry Dennison was in exuberant spirits. The great company was on the
verge of actual existence. From the chrysalis of its syndicate stage it
was to issue a bright butterfly.

"And Ruston was most complimentary to our house. He said he could never
have carried it through without us. He's in high feather."

Mrs. Dennison listened to more details, thinking, as her husband talked,
that Ruston's cheerful mood was fully explained, but wondering that he
had not himself thought it worth while to explain to her the cause of it
a little more fully. With that achievement fresh in his hand, he had
been content to hold his peace. Did he think her not worth telling?

With a cloud on her brow and her smile eclipsed, she passed on to the
drawing-room. The window was open and she saw Tom Loring's back in the
balcony. Then she heard her friend Mrs. Cormack's rather shrill voice.

"Not say such things?" the voice cried, and Mrs. Dennison could picture
the whirl of expostulatory hands that accompanied the question. "But why
not?"

Tom's voice answered in the careful tones of a man who is trying not to
lose his temper, or, anyhow, to conceal the loss.

"Well, apart from anything else, suppose Dennison heard you? It wouldn't
be over-pleasant for him."

Mrs. Dennison stood still, slowly peeling off her gloves.

"Oh, the poor man! I would not like to hurt him. I will be silent. Oh,
he does his very best! But you can't help it."

Mrs. Dennison stepped a yard nearer the window.

"Help what?" asked Tom in the deepest exasperation, no longer to be
hidden.

"Why, what must happen? It must be that the true man----"

A smile flickered over Maggie Dennison's face. How like Berthe! But
whence came this topic?

"Nonsense, I tell you!" cried Tom with a stamp of his foot.

And at the sound Mrs. Dennison smiled again, and drew yet nearer to the
window.

"Oh, it's always nonsense what I say! Well, we shall see, Mr. Loring,"
and Mrs. Cormack tripped in through her window, and wrote in her
diary--she kept a diary full of reflections--that Englishmen were all
stupid. She had written that before, but the deep truth bore repetition.

Tom went in too, and found himself face to face with Mrs. Dennison.
Bright spots of colour glowed on her cheeks; had she answered the
question of the origin of the topic? Tom blushed and looked furtively at
her.

"So the great scheme is launched," she remarked, "and Mr. Ruston
triumphs!"

Tom's manner betrayed intense relief, but he was still perturbed.

"We're having a precious lot of Ruston," he observed, leaning against
the mantelpiece and putting his hands in his pockets.

"_I_ like him," said Maggie Dennison.

"Those are the orders, are they?" asked Tom with a rather wry smile.

"Yes," she answered, smiling at Tom's smile. It amused her when he put
her manner into words.

"Then we all like him," said Tom, and, feeling quite secure now, he
added, "Mrs. Cormack said we should, which is rather against him."

"Oh, Berthe's a silly woman. Never mind her. Harry likes him too."

"Lucky for Ruston he does. Your husband's a useful friend. I fancy most
of Ruston's friends are of the useful variety."

"And why shouldn't we be useful to him?"

"On the contrary, it seems our destiny," grumbled Tom, whose destiny
appeared not to please him.




                              CHAPTER IV.

                          TWO YOUNG GENTLEMEN.


Lady Valentine was the widow of a baronet of good family and respectable
means; the one was to be continued and the other absorbed by her son,
young Sir Walter, now an Oxford undergraduate and just turned twenty-one
years of age. Lady Valentine had a jointure, and Marjory a pretty face.
The remaining family assets were a country-house of moderate dimensions
in the neighbourhood of Maidenhead, and a small flat in Cromwell Road.
Lady Valentine deplored the rise of the plutocracy, and had sometimes
secretly hoped that a plutocrat would marry her daughter. In other
respects she was an honest and unaffected woman.

Young Sir Walter, however, had his own views for his sister, and young
Sir Walter, when he surveyed the position which the laws and customs of
the realm gave him, was naturally led to suppose that his opinion had
some importance. He was hardly responsible for the error, and very
probably Mr. Ruston would have been better advised had his bearing
towards the young man not indicated so very plainly that the error was
an error. But in the course of the visits to Cromwell Road, which Ruston
found time to pay in the intervals of floating the Omofaga Company--and
he was a man who found time for many things--this impression of his made
itself tolerably evident, and, consequently, Sir Walter entertained
grave doubts whether Ruston were a gentleman. And, if a fellow is not a
gentleman, what, he asked, do brains and all the rest of it go for?
Moreover, how did the chap live? To which queries Marjory answered that
"Oxford boys" were very silly--a remark which embittered, without in the
least elucidating, the question.

Almost everybody has one disciple who looks up to him as master and
mentor, and, ill as he was suited to such a post, Evan Haselden filled
it for Walter Valentine. Evan had been in his fourth year when Walter
was a freshman, and the reverence engendered in those days had been
intensified when Evan had become, first, secretary to a minister and
then, as he showed diligence and aptitude, a member of Parliament. Evan
was a strong Tory, but payment of members had an unholy attraction for
him; this indication of his circumstances may suffice. Men thought him a
promising youth, women called him a nice boy, and young Sir Walter held
him for a statesman and a man of the world.

Seeing that what Sir Walter wanted was an unfavourable opinion of
Ruston, he could not have done better than consult his respected friend.
Juggernaut--Adela Ferrars was pleased with the nickname, and it began to
be repeated--had been crushing Evan in one or two little ways lately,
and he did it with an unconsciousness that increased the brutality.
Besides displacing him from the position he wished to occupy at more
than one social gathering, Ruston, being in the Lobby of the House one
day (perhaps on Omofaga business), had likened the pretty (it was his
epithet) young member, as he sped with a glass of water to his party
leader, to Ganymede in a frock coat--a description, Evan felt, injurious
to a serious politician.

"A gentleman?" he said, in reply to young Sir Walter's inquiry. "Well,
everybody's a gentleman now, so I suppose Ruston is."

"I call him an unmannerly brute," observed Walter, "and I can't think
why mother and Marjory are so civil to him."

Evan shook his head mournfully.

"You meet the fellow everywhere," he sighed.

"Such an ugly mug as he's got too," pursued young Sir Walter. "But
Marjory says it's full of character."

"Character! I should think so. Enough to hang him on sight," said Evan
bitterly.

"He's been a lot to our place. Marjory seems to like him. I say,
Haselden, do you remember what you spoke of after dinner at the Savoy
the other day?"

Evan nodded, looking rather embarrassed; indeed he blushed, and little
as he liked doing that, it became him very well.

"Did you mean it? Because, you know, I should like it awfully."

"Thanks, Val, old man. Oh, rather, I meant it."

Young Sir Walter lowered his voice and looked cautiously round--they
were in the club smoking-room.

"Because I thought, you know, that you were rather--you know--Adela
Ferrars?"

"Nothing in that, only _pour passer le temps_," Evan assured him with
that superb man-of-the-worldliness.

It was a pity that Adela could not hear him. But there was more to
follow.

"The truth is," resumed Evan--"and, of course, I rely on your discretion,
Val--I thought there might be a--an obstacle."

Young Sir Walter looked knowing.

"When you were good enough to suggest what you did--about your sister--I
doubted for a moment how such a thing would be received by--well, at a
certain house."

"Oh!"

"I shouldn't wonder if you could guess."

"N--no, I don't think so."

"Well, it doesn't matter where."

"Oh, but I say, you might as well tell me. Hang it, I've learnt to hold
my tongue."

"You hadn't noticed it? That's all right. I'm glad to hear it," said
Evan, whose satisfaction was not conspicuous in his tone.

"I'm so little in town, you see," said Walter tactfully.

"Well--for heaven's sake, don't let it go any farther--Curzon Street."

"What! Of course! Mrs.----"

"All right, yes. But I've made up my mind. I shall drop all that. Best,
isn't it?"

Walter nodded a sagacious assent.

"There was never anything in it, really," said Evan, and he was not
displeased with his friend's incredulous expression. It is a great
luxury to speak the truth and yet not be believed.

"Now, what you propose," continued Evan, "is most--but, I say, Val, what
does she think?"

"She likes you--and you'll have all my influence," said the Head of the
Family in a tone of importance.

"But how do you know she likes me?" insisted Evan, whose off-hand air
gave place to a manner betraying some trepidation.

"I don't know for certain, of course. And, I say, Haselden, I believe
mother's got an idea in her head about that fellow Ruston."

"The devil! That brute! Oh, hang it, Val, she can't--your sister, I
mean--I tell you what, I shan't play the fool any longer."

Sir Walter cordially approved of increased activity, and the two young
gentlemen, having settled one lady's future and disposed of the claims
of two others to their complete satisfaction, betook themselves to
recreation.

Evan was not, however, of opinion that anything in the conversation
above recorded, imposed upon him the obligation of avoiding entirely
Mrs. Dennison's society. On the contrary, he took an early opportunity
of going to see her. His attitude towards her was one of considerably
greater deference than Sir Walter understood it to be, and he had a high
idea of the value of her assistance. And he did not propose to deny
himself such savour of sentiment as the lady would allow; and she
generally allowed a little. He intended to say nothing about Ruston, but
as it happened that Mrs. Dennison's wishes set in an opposing direction,
he had not been long in the drawing room at Curzon Street before he
found himself again with the name of his enemy on his lips. He spoke
with refreshing frankness and an engaging confidence in his hostess'
sympathy. Mrs. Dennison had no difficulty in seeing that he had a
special reason for his bitterness.

"Is it only because he called you Ganymede? And it's a very good name
for you, Mr. Haselden."

To be compared to Ganymede in private by a lady and in public by a
scoffer, are things very different. Evan smiled complacently.

"There's more than that, isn't there?" asked Mrs. Dennison.

Evan admitted that there was more, and, in obedience to some skilful
guidance, he revealed what there was more--what beyond mere offended
dignity--between himself and Mr. Ruston. He had to complain of no lack
of interest on the part of his listener. Mrs. Dennison questioned him
closely as to his grounds for anticipating Ruston's rivalry. The idea
was evidently quite new to her; and Evan was glad to detect her
reluctance to accept it--she must think as he did about Willie Ruston.
The tangible evidence appeared on examination reassuringly small, and
Evan, by a strange conversion, found himself driven to defend his
apprehensions by insisting on just that power of attraction in his foe
which he had begun by denying altogether. But that, Mrs. Dennison
objected, only showed, even if it existed, that Marjory might like
Ruston, not that Ruston would return her liking. On the whole Mrs.
Dennison comforted him, and, dismissing Ruston from the discussion, said
with a smile,

"So you're thinking of settling down already, are you?"

"I say, Mrs. Dennison, you've always been awfully good to me; I wonder
if you'd help me in this?"

"How could I help you?"

"Oh, lots of ways. Well, for instance, old Lady Valentine doesn't ask me
there often. You see, I haven't got any money."

"Poor boy! Of course you haven't. Nice young men never have any money."

"So I don't get many chances of seeing her."

"And I might arrange meetings for you? That's how I could help? Now, why
should I help?"

Evan was encouraged by this last question, put in his friend's
doubtfully-serious doubtfully-playful manner.

"It needn't," he said, in a tone rather more timid than young Sir Walter
would have expected, "make any difference to our friendship, need it? If
it meant that----"

The sentence was left in expressive incompleteness.

Mrs. Dennison wanted to laugh; but why should she hurt his feelings? He
was a pleasant boy, and, in spite of his vanity, really a clever one. He
had been a little spoilt; that was all. She turned her laugh in another
direction.

"Berthe Cormack would tell you that it would be sure to intensify it,"
she said. "Seriously, I shan't hate you for marrying, and I don't
suppose Marjory will hate me."

"Then" (Mrs. Dennison had to smile at that little word), "you'll help
me?"

"Perhaps," said Mrs. Dennison, allowing her smile to become manifest.

"You won't be against me?"

"Perhaps not."

"Good-bye," said Evan, pressing her hand.

He had enjoyed himself very much, and Mrs. Dennison was glad that she
had been good-natured, and had not laughed.

"Good-bye, and I hope you'll be very happy, if you succeed.
And--Evan--don't kill Mr. Ruston!"

The laugh came at last, but he was out of the door in time, and Mrs.
Dennison had no leisure to enjoy it fully, for, the moment her visitor
was gone, Mr. Belford and Lord Semingham were announced. They came
together, seeking Harry Dennison. There was a "little hitch" of some
sort in the affairs of the Omofaga Company--nothing of consequence, said
Mr. Belford reassuringly. Mrs. Dennison explained that Harry Dennison
had gone off to call on Mr. Ruston.

"Oh, then he knows by now," said Semingham in a tone of relief.

"And it'll be all right," added Belford contentedly.

"Mr. Belford," said Mrs. Dennison, "I'm living in an atmosphere of
Omofaga. I eat it, and drink it, and wear it, and breathe it. And, what
in the end, is it?"

"Ask Ruston," interposed Semingham.

"I did; but I don't think he told me."

"But surely, my dear Mrs. Dennison, your husband takes you into his
confidence?" suggested Mr. Belford.

Mrs. Dennison smiled, as she replied,

"Oh, yes, I know what you're doing. But I want to know why you're doing
it. I don't believe you'll ever get anything out of it, you know."

"Oh, directors always get something," protested Semingham. "Penal
servitude sometimes, but always something."

"I've never had such implicit faith in any undertaking in my life,"
asserted Mr. Belford. "And I know that your husband shares my views.
It's bound to be the greatest success of the day. Ah, here's Dennison!"

Harry came in wiping his brow. Belford rushed to him, and drew him to
the window, button-holing him with decision. Lord Semingham smiled
lazily and pulled his whisker.

"Don't you want to hear the news?" Mrs. Dennison asked.

"No! He's been to Ruston."

Mrs. Dennison looked at him for an instant with something rather like
scorn in her eye. Lord Semingham laughed.

"I'm not quite as bad as that, really," he said.

"And the others?" she asked, leaning forward and taking care that her
voice did not reach the other pair.

"He turns Belford round his fingers."

"And Mr. Carlin?"

"In his pocket."

Mrs. Dennison cast a glance towards the window.

"Don't go on," implored Semingham, half-seriously.

"And my husband?" she asked in a still lower voice.

Lord Semingham protested with a gesture against such cross-examination.

"Surely it's a good thing for me to know?" she said.

"Well--a great influence."

"Thank you."

There was a pause for an instant. Then she rose with a laugh and rang
the bell for tea.

"I hope he won't ruin us all," she said.

"I've got Bessie's settlement," observed Lord Semingham; and he added
after a moment's pause, "What's the matter? I thought you were a
thoroughgoing believer."

"I'm a woman," she answered. "If I were a man----"

"You'd be the prophet, not the disciple, eh?"

She looked at him, and then across to the couple by the window.

"To do Belford justice," remarked Semingham, reading her glance, "he
never admits that he isn't a great man--though surely he must know it."

"Is it better to know it, or not to know it?" she asked, restlessly
fingering the teapot and cups which had been placed before her. "I
sometimes think that if you resolutely refuse to know it, you can alter
it."

Belford's name had been the only name mentioned in the conversation; yet
Semingham knew that she was not thinking of Belford nor of him.

"I knew it about myself very soon," he said. "It makes a man better to
know it, Mrs. Dennison."

"Oh, yes--better," she answered impatiently.

The two men came and joined them. Belford accepted a cup of tea, and, as
he took it, he said to Harry, continuing their conversation,

"Of course, I know his value; but, after all, we must judge for
ourselves."

"Of course," acquiesced Harry, handing him bread-and-butter.

"We are the masters," pursued Belford.

Mrs. Dennison glanced at him, and a smile so full of meaning--of meaning
which it was as well Mr. Belford should not see--appeared on her face,
that Lord Semingham deftly interposed his person between them, and said,
with apparent seriousness,

"Oh, he mustn't think he can do just what he likes with us."

"I am entirely of your opinion," said Belford, with a weighty nod.

After tea, Lord Semingham walked slowly back to his own house. He had a
trick of stopping still, when he fell into thought, and he was
motionless on the pavement of Piccadilly more than once on his way home.
The last time he paused for nearly three minutes, till an acquaintance,
passing by, clapped him on the back, and inquired what occupied his
mind.

"I was thinking," said Semingham, laying his forefinger on his friend's
arm, "that if you take what a clever man really is, and add to it what a
clever woman who is interested in him thinks he is, you get a most
astonishing person."

The friend stared. The speculation seemed hardly pressing enough to
excuse a man for blocking the pavement of Piccadilly.

"If, on the other hand," pursued Semingham, "you take what an ordinary
man isn't, and add all that a clever woman thinks he isn't, you get----"

"Hadn't we better go on, old fellow?" asked the friend.

"No, I think we'd better not," said Semingham, starting to walk again.




                               CHAPTER V.

                        A TELEGRAM TO FRANKFORT.


The success of Lady Valentine's Saturday to Monday party at Maidenhead
was spoilt by the unscrupulous, or (if the charitable view be possible)
the muddle-headed conduct of certain eminent African chiefs--so small is
the world, so strong the chain of gold (or shares) that binds it
together. The party was marred by Willie Ruston's absence; and he was
away because he had to go to Frankfort, and he had to go to Frankfort
because of that little hitch in the affairs of the Omofaga. The hitch
was, in truth, a somewhat grave one, and it occurred, most annoyingly,
immediately after a gathering, marked by uncommon enthusiasm and
composed of highly influential persons, had set the impress of approval
on the scheme. On the following morning, it was asserted that the said
African chiefs, from whom Ruston and his friends derived their title to
Omofaga, had acted in a manner that belied the character for honesty and
simplicity in commercial matters (existing side by side with intense
savagery and cruelty in social and political life) that Mr. Foster
Belford had attributed to them at the great meeting. They had, it was
said, sold Omofaga several times over in small parcels, and twice, at
least, _en bloc_--once to the Syndicate (from whom the Company was
acquiring it) and once to an association of German capitalists. The
writer of the article, who said that he knew the chiefs well, went so
far as to maintain that any person provided with a few guns and a dozen
or so bottles of ardent spirits could return from Omofaga with a
portmanteau full of treaties, and this facility in obtaining the article
could not, in accordance with the law of supply and demand, do other
than gravely affect the value of it. Willie Ruston was inclined to make
light of this disclosure; indeed, he attributed it to a desire--natural
but unprincipled--on the part of certain persons to obtain Omofaga
shares at less than their high intrinsic value; he called it a "bear
dodge" and sundry other opprobrious names, and snapped his fingers at
all possible treaties in the world except his own. Once let him set his
foot in Omofaga, and short would be the shrift of rival claims,
supposing them to exist at all! But the great house of Dennison, Sons &
Company, could not go on in this happy-go-lucky fashion--so the senior
partner emphatically told Harry Dennison--they were already, in his
opinion, deep enough in this affair; if they were to go any deeper, this
matter of the association of German capitalists must be inquired into.
The house had not only its money, but its credit and reputation to look
after; it could not touch any doubtful business, nor could it be left
with a block of Omofagas on its hands. In effect they were trusting too
much to this Mr. Ruston, for he, and he alone, was their security in the
matter. Not another step would the house move till the German
capitalists were dissolved into thin air. So Willie Ruston packed his
portmanteau--likely enough the very one that had carried the treaties
away from Omofaga--and went to Frankfort to track the German capitalists
to their lair. Meanwhile, the issue of the Omofaga was postponed, and
Mr. Carlin was set a-telegraphing to Africa.

Thus it also happened that, contrary to her fixed intention, Lady
Valentine was left with a bedroom to spare, and with no just or
producible reason whatever for refusing her son's request that Evan
Haselden might occupy it. This, perhaps, should, in the view of all true
lovers, be regarded as an item on the credit side of the African chiefs'
account, though in the hostess' eyes it aggravated their offence. Adela
Ferrars, Mr. Foster Belford and Tom Loring, who positively blessed the
African chiefs, were the remaining guests.

All parties cannot be successful, and, if truth be told, this of Lady
Valentine's was no conspicuous triumph. Belford and Loring quarrelled
about Omofaga, for Loring feared (he used that word) that there might be
a good deal in the German treaties, and Belford was loud-mouthed in
declaring there could be nothing. Marjory and her brother had a "row"
because Marjory, on the Saturday afternoon, would not go out in the
Canadian canoe with Evan, but insisted on taking a walk with Mr. Belford
and hearing all about Omofaga. Finally, Adela and Tom Loring had a
rather serious dissension because--well, just because Tom was so
intolerably stupid and narrow-minded and rude. That was Adela's own
account of it, given in her own words, which seems pretty good
authority.

The unfortunate discussion began with an expression of opinion from Tom.
They were lounging very comfortably down stream in a broad-bottomed
boat. It was a fine still evening and a lovely sunset. It was then most
wanton of Tom--even although he couched his remark in a speciously
general form--to say,

"I wonder at fellows who spend their life worming money out of other
people for wild-cat schemes instead of taking to some honest trade."

There was a pause. Then Adela fitted her glasses on her nose, and
observed, with a careful imitation of Tom's forms of expression,

"I wonder at fellows who drift through life in subordinate positions
without the--the _spunk_--to try and do anything for themselves."

"Women have no idea of honesty."

"Men are such jealous creatures."

"I'm not jealous of him," Tom blurted out.

"Of who?" asked Adela.

She was keeping the cooler of the pair.

"Confound those beastly flies," said Tom, peevishly. There was a fly or
two about, but Adela smiled in a superior way. "I suppose I've some
right to express an opinion," continued Tom. "You know what I feel about
the Dennisons, and--well, it's not only the Dennisons."

"Oh! the Valentines?"

"Blow the Valentines!" said Tom, very ungratefully, inasmuch as he sat
in their boat and had eaten their bread.

He bent over his sculls, and Adela looked at him with a doubtful little
smile. She thought Tom Loring, on the whole, the best man she knew, the
truest and loyalest; but, these qualities are not everything, and it
seemed as if he meant to be secretary to Harry Dennison all his life. Of
course he had no money, there was that excuse; but to some men want of
money is a reason, not for doing nothing, but for attempting everything;
it had struck Willie Ruston in that light. Therefore she was at times
angry with Tom--and all the more angry the more she admired him.

"You do me the honour to be anxious on my account?" she asked very
stiffly.

"He asked me how much money you had the other day."

"Oh, you're insufferable; you really are. Do you always tell women that
men care only for their money?"

"It's not a bad thing to tell them when it's true."

"I call this the very vulgarest dispute I was ever entrapped into."

"It's not my fault. It's----Hullo!"

His attention was arrested by Lady Valentine's footman, who stood on the
bank, calling "Mr. Loring, sir," and holding up a telegram.

"Thank goodness, we're interrupted," said Adela. "Row ashore, Mr.
Loring."

Loring obeyed, and took his despatch. It was from Harry Dennison, and he
read it aloud.

    "Can you come up? News from Frankfort."

"I must go," said Tom.

"Oh, yes. If you're not there, Mr. Ruston will do something dreadful,
won't he? I should like to come too. News from Frankfort would be more
interesting than views from Mr. Belford."

They parted without any approach towards a reconciliation. Tom was
hopelessly sulky, Adela persistently flippant. The shadow of Omofaga lay
heavy on Lady Valentine's party, and still shrouded Tom Loring on his
way to town.

The important despatch from Frankfort had come in cipher, and when Tom
arrived in Curzon Street, he found Mr. Carlin, who had been sent for to
read it, just leaving the house. The men nodded to one another, and
Carlin hastily exclaimed,

"You must reassure Dennison! You can do it!" and leapt into a hansom.

Tom smiled. If the progress of Omofaga depended on encouragement from
him, Omofaga would remain in primitive barbarism, though missionaries
fell thick as the leaves in autumn.

Harry Dennison was walking up and down the library; his hair was
roughened and his appearance indicative of much unrest; his wife sat in
an armchair, looking at him and listening to Lord Semingham, who,
poising a cigarette between his fingers, was putting, or trying to put,
a meaning to Ruston's message.

    "Position critical. Must act at once. Will you give me a free
    hand? If not, wire how far I may go."

That was how it ran when faithfully interpreted by Mr. Carlin.

"You see," observed Lord Semingham, "it's clearly a matter of money."

Tom nodded.

"Of course it is," said he; "it's not likely to be a question of
anything else."

"Therefore the Germans have something worth paying for," continued
Semingham.

"Well," amended Tom, "something Ruston thinks it worth his while to pay
for, anyhow."

"That is to say they have treaties touching, or purporting to touch,
Omofaga."

"And," added Harry Dennison, who did not lack a certain business
shrewdness, "probably their Government behind them to some extent."

Tom flung himself into a chair.

"The thing's monstrous," he pronounced. "Semingham and you, Dennison,
are, besides himself--and he's got nothing--the only people responsible
up to now. And he asks you to give him an unlimited credit without
giving you a word of information! It's the coolest thing I ever heard of
in all my life."

"Of course he means the Company to pay in the end," Semingham reminded
the hostile critic.

"Time enough to talk of the Company when we see it," retorted Tom, with
an aggressive scepticism.

"Position critical! Hum. I suppose their treaties must be worth
something," pursued Semingham. "Dennison, I can't be drained dry over
this job."

Harry Dennison shook his head in a puzzled fashion.

"Carlin says it's all right," he remarked.

"Of course he does!" exclaimed Tom impatiently. "Two and two make five
for him if Ruston says they do."

"Well, Tom, what's your advice?" asked Semingham.

"You must tell him to do nothing till he's seen you, or at least sent
you full details of the position."

The two men nodded. Mrs. Dennison rose from her chair, walked to the
window, and stood looking out.

"Loring just confirms what I thought," said Semingham.

"He says he must act at once," Harry reminded them; he was still
wavering, and, as he spoke, he glanced uneasily at his wife; but there
was nothing to show that she even heard the conversation.

"Oh, he hates referring to anybody," said Tom. "He's to have a free
hand, and you're to pay the bill. That's his programme, and a very
pretty one it is--for him."

Tom's _animus_ was apparent, and Lord Semingham laughed gently.

"Still, you're right in substance," he conceded when the laugh was
ended, and as he spoke he drew a sheet of notepaper towards him and took
up a pen.

"We'd better settle just what to say," he observed. "Carlin will be back
in half an hour, and we promised to have it ready for him. What you
suggest seems all right, Loring."

Tom nodded. Harry Dennison stood stock still for an instant and then
said, with a sigh,

"I suppose so. He'll be furious--and I hope to God we shan't lose the
whole thing."

Lord Semingham's pen-point was in actual touch with the paper before
him, when Mrs. Dennison suddenly turned round and faced them. She rested
one hand on the window-sash, and held the other up in a gesture which
demanded attention.

"Are you really going to back out now?" she asked in a very quiet voice,
but with an intonation of contempt that made all the three men raise
their heads with the jerk of startled surprise. Lord Semingham checked
the movement of his pen, and leant back in his chair, looking at her.
Her face was a little flushed and she was breathing quickly.

"My dear," said Harry Dennison very apologetically, "do you think you
quite understand----?"

But Tom Loring's patience was exhausted. His interview with Adela left
him little reserve of toleration; and the discovery of another and even
worse case of Rustomania utterly overpowered his discretion.

"Mrs. Dennison," he said, "wants us to deliver ourselves, bound hand and
foot, to this fellow."

"Well, and if I do?" she demanded, turning on him. "Can't you even
follow, when you've found a man who can lead?"

And then, conscious perhaps of having been goaded to an excess of warmth
by Tom's open scorn, she turned her face away.

"Lead, yes! Lead us to ruin!" exclaimed Tom.

"You won't be ruined, anyhow," she retorted quickly, facing round on him
again, reckless in her anger how she might wound him.

"Tom's anxious for us, Maggie," her husband reminded her, and he laid
his hand on Tom Loring's shoulder.

Tom's excitement was not to be soothed.

"Why are we all to be his instruments?" he demanded angrily.

"I should be proud to be," she said haughtily.

Her husband smiled in an uneasy effort after nonchalance, and Lord
Semingham shot a quick glance at her out of his observant eyes.

"I should be proud of a friend like you if I were Ruston," he said
gently, hoping to smooth matters a little.

Mrs. Dennison ignored his attempt.

"Can't you see?" she asked. "Can't you see that he's a man to--to do
things? It's enough for us if we can help him."

She had forgotten her embarrassment; she spoke half in contempt, half in
entreaty, wholly in an earnest urgency, that made her unconscious of any
strangeness in her zeal. Harry looked uncomfortable. Semingham with a
sigh blew a cloud of smoke from his cigarette.

Tom Loring sat silent. He stretched out his legs to their full length,
rested the nape of his neck on the chair-back, and stared up at the
ceiling. His attitude eloquently and most rudely asserted folly--almost
lunacy--in Mrs. Dennison. She noticed it and her eyes flashed, but she
did not speak to him. She looked at Semingham and surprised an
expression in his eyes that made her drop her own for an instant; she
knew very well what he was thinking--what a man like him would think.
But she recovered herself and met his glance boldly.

Harry Dennison sat down and slowly rubbed his brow with his
handkerchief. Lord Semingham took up the pen and balanced it between his
fingers. There was silence in the room for full three minutes. Then came
a loud knock at the hall door.

"It's Carlin," said Harry Dennison.

No one else spoke, and for another moment there was silence. The steps
of the butler and the visitor were already audible in the hall when Lord
Semingham, with his own shrug and his own smile, as though nothing in
the world were worth so much dispute or so much bitterness, said to
Dennison,

"Hang it! Shall we chance it, Harry?"

Mrs. Dennison made one swift step forward towards him, her face all
alight; but she stopped before she reached the table and turned to her
husband. At the moment Carlin was announced. He entered with a rush of
eagerness. Tom Loring did not move. Semingham wrote on his paper,--

    "Use your discretion, but make every effort to keep down
    expenses. Wire progress."

"Will that do?" he asked, handing the paper to Harry Dennison and
leaning back with a smile on his face; and, though he handed the paper
to Harry, he looked at Mrs. Dennison.

Mrs. Dennison was standing by her husband now, her arm through his. As
he read she read also. Then she took the paper from his yielding hand
and came and bent over the table, shoulder to shoulder with Lord
Semingham. Taking the pen from his fingers, she dipped it in the ink,
and with a firm dash she erased all save the first three words of the
message. This done, she looked round into Semingham's face with a smile
of triumph.

"Well, it'll be cheap to send, anyhow," said he.

He got up and motioned Carlin to take his place.

Mrs. Dennison walked back to the window, and he followed her there. They
heard Carlin's cry of delight, and Harry Dennison beginning to make
excuses and trying to find business reasons for what had been done.
Suddenly Tom Loring leapt to his feet and strode swiftly out of the
room, slamming the door behind him. Mrs. Dennison heard the sound with a
smile of content. She seemed to have no misgivings and no regrets.

"Really," said Lord Semingham, sticking his eye-glass in his eye and
regarding her closely, "you ought to be the Queen of Omofaga."

With her slim fingers she began to drum gently on the window-pane.

"I think there's a king already," she said, looking out into the street.

"Oh, yes, a king," he answered with a laugh.

Mrs. Dennison looked round. He did not stop laughing, and presently she
laughed just a little herself.

"Oh, of course, it's always that in a woman, isn't it?" she asked
sarcastically.

"Generally," he answered, unashamed.

She grew grave, and looked in his face almost--so it seemed to him--as
though she sought there an answer to something that puzzled her. He gave
her none. She sighed and drummed on the window again; then she turned to
him with a sudden bright smile.

"I don't care; I'm glad I did it," she said defiantly.




                              CHAPTER VI.

                           WHOSE SHALL IT BE?


Probably no one is always wrong; at any rate, Mr. Otto Heather was right
now and then, and he had hit the mark when he accused Willie Ruston of
"commercialism." But he went astray when he concluded, _per saltum_,
that the object of his antipathy was a money-grubbing, profit-snatching,
upper-hand-getting machine, and nothing else in the world. Probably,
again, no one ever was. Ruston had not only feelings, but also what many
people consider a later development--a conscience. And, whatever the
springs on which his conscience moved, it acted as a restraint upon him.
Both his feelings and his conscience would have told him that it would
not do for him to delude his friends or the public with a scheme which
was a fraud. He would have delivered this inner verdict in calm and
temperate terms; it would have been accompanied by no disgust, no
remorse, no revulsion at the idea having made its way into his mind; it
was just that, on the whole, such a thing wouldn't do. The vagueness of
the phrase faithfully embodied the spirit of the decision, for whether
it wouldn't do, because it was in itself unseemly, or merely because, if
found out, it would look unseemly, was precisely one of those curious
points with which Mr. Ruston's practical intellect declined to trouble
itself. If Omofaga had been a fraud, then Ruston would have whistled it
down the wind. But Omofaga was no fraud--in his hands at least no fraud.
For, while he believed in Omofaga to a certain extent, Willie Ruston
believed in himself to an indefinite, perhaps an infinite, extent. He
thought Omofaga a fair security for anyone's money, but himself a superb
one. Omofaga without him--or other people's Omofagas--might be a
promising speculation; add him, and Omofaga became a certainty. It will
be seen, then, that Mr. Heather's inspiration had soon failed--unless,
that is, machines can see visions and dream dreams, and melt down hard
facts in crucibles heated to seven times in the fires of imagination.
But a man may do all this, and yet not be the passive victim of his
dreams and imaginings. The old buccaneers--and Adela Ferrars had thought
Ruston a buccaneer modernised--dreamt, but they sailed and fought too;
and they sailed and fought and won because they dreamt. And if many of
their dreams were tinted with the gleam of gold, they were none the less
powerful and alluring for that.

Ruston had laid the whole position before Baron von Geltschmidt of
Frankfort, with--as it seemed--the utmost candour. He and his friends
were not deeply committed in the matter; there was, as yet, only a small
syndicate; of course they had paid something for their rights, but, as
the Baron knew (and Willie's tone emphasised the fact that he must know)
the actual sums paid out of pocket in these cases were not of staggering
magnitude; no company was formed yet; none would be, unless all went
smoothly. If the Baron and his friends were sure of their ground, and
preferred to go on--why, he and his friends were not eager to commit
themselves to a long and arduous contest. There must, he supposed, be a
give-and-take between them.

"It looks," he said, "as far as I can judge, as if either we should have
to buy you out, or you would have to buy us out."

"Perhaps," suggested the Baron, blinking lazily behind his gold
spectacles, "we could get rid of you without buying you out."

"Oh, if you drove us to it, by refusing to treat, we should have a shot
at that too, of course," laughed Willie Ruston, swallowing a glass of
white wine. The Baron had asked him to discuss the matter over luncheon.

"It seems to me," observed the Baron, lighting a cigar, "that people are
rather cold about speculations just now."

"I should think so; but this is not a speculation; it's a certainty."

"Why do you tell me that, when you want to get rid of me?"

"Because you won't believe it. Wasn't that Bismarck's way?"

"You are not Bismarck--and a certainty is what the public thinks one."

"Is that philosophy or finance?" asked Ruston, laughing again.

The Baron, who had in his day loved both the subjects referred to, drank
a glass of wine and chuckled as he delivered himself of the following
doctrine:

"What the public thinks a certainty, is a certainty for the public--that
would be philosophy, eh?"

"I believe so. I never read much, and your extract doesn't raise my idea
of its value."

"But what the public thinks a certainty, is a certainty--for the
promotors--that is finance. You see the difference is simple."

"And the distinction luminous. This, Baron, seems to be the age of
finance."

"Ah, well, there are still honest men," said the Baron, with the
optimism of age.

"Yes, I'm one--and you're another."

"I'm much obliged. You've been in Omofaga?"

"Oh, yes. And you haven't, Baron."

"Friends of mine have."

"Yes. They came just after I left."

The Baron knew that this statement was true. As his study of Willie
Ruston progressed, he became inclined to think that it might be
important. Mere right (so far as such a thing could be given by prior
treaties) was not of much moment; but right and Ruston together might be
formidable. Now the Baron (and his friends were friends much in the way,
_mutatis mutandis_, that Mr. Wagg and Mr. Wenham were friends of the
Marquis of Steyne, and may therefore drop out of consideration) was old
and rich, and, by consequence, at a great disadvantage with a man who
was young and poor.

"I don't see the bearing of that," he observed, having paused for a
moment to consider all its bearings.

"It means that you can't have Omofaga," said Willie Ruston. "You were
too late, you see."

The Baron smoked and drank and laughed.

"You're a young fool, my boy--or something quite different," said he,
laying a hand on his companion's arm. Then he asked suddenly, "What
about Dennisons?"

"They're behind me if----"

"Well?"

"If you're not in front of me."

"But if I am, my son?" asked the Baron, almost caressingly.

"Then I leave for Omofaga by the next boat."

"Eh! And for what?"

"Never mind what. You'll find out when you come."

The Baron sighed and tugged his beard.

"You English!" said he. "Your Government won't help you."

"Damn my Government."

"You English!" said the Baron again, his tone struggling between
admiration and a sort of oppression, while his face wore the look a man
has who sees another push in front of him in a crowd, and wonders how
the fellow works his way through.

There was a long pause. Ruston lit his pipe, and, crossing his arms on
his breast, blinked at the sun; the Baron puffed away, shooting a glance
now and then at his young friend, then he asked,

"Well, my boy, what do you offer?"

"Shares," answered Ruston composedly.

The Baron laughed. The impudence of the offer pleased him.

"Yes, shares, of course. And besides?"

Willie Ruston turned to him.

"I shan't haggle," he announced. "I'll make you one offer, Baron, and
it's an uncommon handsome offer for a trunk of waste paper."

"What's the offer?" asked the Baron, smiling with rich subdued mirth.

"Fifty thousand down, and the same in shares fully paid."

"Not enough, my son."

"All right," and Mr. Ruston rose. "Much obliged for your hospitality,
Baron," he added, holding out his hand.

"Where are you going?" asked the Baron.

"Omofaga--_viâ_ London."

The Baron caught him by the arm, and whispered in his ear,

"There's not so much in it, first and last."

"Oh, isn't there? Then why don't you take the offer?"

"Is it your money?"

"It's good money. Come, Baron, you've always liked the safe side," and
Willie smiled down upon his host.

The Baron positively started. This young man stood over him and told him
calmly, face-to-face, the secret of his life. It was true. How he had
envied men of real nerve, of faith, of daring! But he had always liked
the safe side. Hence he was very rich--and a rather weary old man.

Two days later, Willie Ruston took a cab from Lord Semingham's, and
drove to Curzon Street. He arrived at twelve o'clock in the morning.
Harry Dennison had gone to a Committee at the House. The butler had just
told him so, when a voice cried from within,

"Is it you, Mr. Ruston?"

Mrs. Dennison was standing in the hall. He went in, and followed her
into the library.

"Well?" she asked, standing by the table, and wasting no time in formal
greetings.

"Oh, it's all right," said he.

"You got my telegram?"

"Your telegram, Mrs. Dennison?" said he with a smile.

"I mean--the telegram," she corrected herself, smiling in her turn.

"Oh, yes," said Ruston, and he took a step towards her. "I've seen Lord
Semingham," he added.

"Yes? And these horrid Germans are out of the way?"

"Yes; and Semingham is letting his shooting this year."

She laughed, and glanced at him as she asked,

"Then it cost a great deal?"

"Fifty thousand!"

"Oh, then we can't take Lord Semingham's shooting, or anybody else's.
Poor Harry!"

"He doesn't know yet?"

"Aren't you almost afraid to tell him, Mr. Ruston?"

"Aren't you, Mrs. Dennison?"

He smiled as he asked, and Mrs. Dennison lifted her eyes to his, and let
them dwell there.

"Why did you do it?" he asked.

"Will the money be lost?"

"Oh, I hope not; but money's always uncertain."

"The thing's not uncertain?"

"No; the thing's certain now."

She sat down with a sigh of satisfaction, and passed her hand over her
broad brow.

"Why did you do it?" Ruston repeated; and she laughed nervously.

"I hate going back," she said, twisting her hands in her lap.

He had asked her the question which she had been asking herself without
response.

He sat down opposite her, flinging his soft cloth hat--for he had not
been home since his arrival in London--on the table.

"What a bad hat!" said Mrs. Dennison, touching it with the end of a
forefinger.

"It's done a journey through Omofaga."

"Ah!" she laughed gently. "Dear old hat!"

"Thanks to you, it'll do another soon."

Mrs. Dennison sat up straight in her chair.

"You hope----?" she began.

"To be on my way in six months," he answered in solid satisfaction.

"And for long?"

"It must take time."

"What must?"

"My work there."

She rose and walked to the window, as she had when she was about to send
the telegram. Now also she was breathing quickly, and the flush, once so
rare on her cheeks, was there again.

"And we," she said in a low voice, looking out of the window, "shall
just hear of you once a year?"

"We shall have regular mails in no time," said he. "Once a year, indeed!
Once a month, Mrs. Dennison!"

With a curious laugh, she dashed the blind-tassel against the window. It
was not for the sake of hearing of her that he wanted the mails. With a
sudden impulse she crossed the room and stood opposite him.

"Do you care _that_," she asked, snapping her fingers, "for any soul
alive? You're delighted to leave us all and go to Omofaga!"

Willie Ruston seemed not to hear; he was mentally organizing the mail
service from Omofaga.

"I beg pardon?" he said, after a perceptible pause.

"Oh!" cried Maggie Dennison, and at last her tone caught his attention.

He looked up with a wrinkle of surprise on his brow.

"Why," said he, "I believe you're angry about something. You look just
as you did on--on the memorable occasion."

"Uh, we aren't all Carlins!" she exclaimed, carried away by her
feelings.

The least she had expected from him was grateful thanks; a homage tinged
with admiration was, in truth, no more than her due; if she had been an
ugly dull woman, yet she had done him a great service, and she was not
an ugly dull woman. But then neither was she Omofaga.

"If everybody was as good a fellow as old Carlin----" began Willie
Ruston.

"If everybody was as useful and docile, you mean; as good a tool for
you----"

At last it was too plain to be missed.

"Hullo!" he exclaimed. "What are you pitching into me for, Mrs.
Dennison?"

His words were ordinary enough, but at last he was looking at her, and
the mails of Omofaga were for a moment forgotten.

"I wish I'd never made them send the wretched telegram," she flashed out
passionately. "Much thanks I get!"

"You shall have a statue in the chief street of the chief town of----"

"How dare you! I'm not a girl to be chaffed."

The tears were standing in her eyes, as she threw herself back in a
chair. Willie Ruston got up and stood by her.

"You'll be proud of that telegram some day," he said, rather as though
he felt bound to pay her a compliment.

"Oh, you think that now?" she said, unconvinced of his sincerity.

"Yes. Though was it very difficult?" he asked with a sudden change of
tone most depreciatory of her exploit.

She glanced at him and smiled joyfully. She liked the depreciation
better than the compliment.

"Not a bit," she whispered, "for me."

He laughed slightly, and shut his lips close again. He began to
understand Mrs. Dennison better.

"Still, though it was easy for you, it was precious valuable to me," he
observed.

"And how you hate being obliged to me, don't you?"

He perceived that she understood him a little, but he smiled again as he
asked,

"Oh, but what made you do it, you know?"

"You mean you did? Mr. Ruston, I should like to see you at work in
Omofaga."

"Oh, a very humdrum business," said he, with a shrug.

"You'll have soldiers?"

"We shall call 'em police," he corrected, smiling.

"Yes; but they keep everybody down, and--and do as you order?"

"If not, I shall ask 'em why."

"And the natives?"

"Civilise 'em."

"You--you'll be governor?"

"Oh, dear, no. Local administrator."

She laughed in his face; and a grim smile from him seemed to justify
her.

"I'm glad I sent the telegram," she half-whispered, lying back in the
chair and looking up at him. "I shall have had something to do with all
that, shan't I? Do you want any more money?"

"Look here," said Willie Ruston, "Omofaga's mine. I'll find you another
place, if you like, when I've put this job through."

A luxury of pleasure rippled through her laugh. She darted out her hand
and caught his.

"No. I like Omofaga too!" she said, and as she said it, the door
suddenly opened, and in walked Tom Loring--that is to say--in Tom Loring
was about to walk; but when he saw what he did see, he stood still for a
moment, and then, without a single word, either of greeting or apology,
he turned his back, walked out again, and shut the door behind him. His
entrance and exit were so quick and sudden, that Mrs. Dennison had
hardly dropped Willie Ruston's hand before he was gone; she had
certainly not dropped it before he came.

Willie Ruston sat down squarely in a chair. Mrs. Dennison's hot mood had
been suddenly cooled. She would not ask him to go, but she glanced at
the hat that had been through Omofaga. He detected her.

"I shall stay ten minutes," he observed.

She understood and nodded assent. Very little was said during the ten
minutes. Mrs. Dennison seemed tired; her eyes dropped towards the
ground, and she reclined in her chair. Ruston was frowning and thrumming
at intervals on the table. But presently his brow cleared and he smiled.
Mrs. Dennison saw him from under her drooping lids.

"Well?" she asked in a petulant tone.

"I believe you were going to fight me for Omofaga."

"I don't know what I was doing."

"Is that fellow a fool?"

"He's a much better man than you'll ever be, Mr. Ruston. Really you
might go now."

"All right, I will. I'm going down to the city to see your husband and
Carlin."

"I'm afraid I've wasted your time."

She spoke with a bitterness which seemed impossible to miss. But he
appeared to miss it.

"Oh, not a bit, really," he assured her anxiously. "Good-bye," he added,
holding out his hand.

"Good-bye. I've shaken hands once."

He waited a moment to see if she would speak again, but she said
nothing. So he left her.

As he called a hansom, Mrs. Cormack was leaning over her balcony. She
took a little jewelled watch out of her pocket and looked at it.

"An hour and a quarter!" she cried. "And I know the poor man isn't at
home!"




                              CHAPTER VII.

                     AN ATTEMPT TO STOP THE WHEELS.


Miss Adela Ferrars lived in Queen's Gate, in company with her aunt, Mrs.
Topham. Mrs. Topham's husband had been the younger son of a peer of
ancient descent; and a practised observer might almost have detected the
fact in her manner, for she took her station in this life as seriously
as her position in the next, and, in virtue of it, assumed a
responsibility for the morals of her inferiors which betrayed a
considerable confidence in her own. But she was a good woman, and a
widow of the pattern most opposite to that of Mrs. Cormack. She dwelt
more truly in the grave of her husband than in Queen's Gate, and
permitted herself no recreations except such as may privily creep into
religious exercises and the ministrations of favourite clergymen; and it
is pleasant to think that she was very happy. As may be supposed,
however, Adela (who was a good woman in quite another way, and therefore
less congenial with her aunt than any mere sinner could have been) and
Mrs. Topham saw very little of one another, and would not have thought
of living together unless each had been able to supply what the other
wanted. Adela found money for the house, and Mrs. Topham lent the
shelter of her name to her niece's unprotected condition. There were
separate sitting-rooms for the two ladies, and, if rumour were true
(which, after all, it usually is not), a separate staircase for the
clergy.

Adela was in her drawing-room one afternoon when Lord Semingham was
announced. He appeared to be very warm, and he carried a bundle of
papers in his hand. Among the papers there was one of those little
smooth white volumes which epitomise so much of the joy and sorrow of
this transitory life. He gave himself a shake, as he sat down, and held
up the book.

"The car has begun to move," he observed.

"Juggernaut's?"

"Yes; and I have been to see my bankers. I take a trip to the seaside
instead of a moor this year, and have let my own pheasant shooting."

He paused and added,

"Dennison has not taken my shooting. They go to the seaside too--with
the children."

He paused again and concluded,

"The Omofaga prospectus will be out to-morrow."

Adela laughed.

"Bessie is really quite annoyed," remarked Lord Semingham. "I have
seldom seen her so perturbed--but I've sent Ruston to talk to her."

"And why did you do it?" asked Adela.

"I should like to tell you a little history," said he.

And he told her how Mrs. Dennison had sent a telegram to Frankfort. This
history was long, for Lord Semingham told it dramatically, as though he
enjoyed its quality. Yet Adela made no comment beyond asking,

"And wasn't she right?"

"Oh, for the Empire perhaps--for us, it means trips to the seaside."

He drew his chair a little nearer hers, and dropped his affectation of
comic plaintiveness.

"A most disgusting thing has happened in Curzon Street," he said. "Have
you heard?"

"No; I've seen nothing of Maggie lately. You've all been buried in
Omofaga."

"Hush! No words of ill-omen, please! Well, it's annoyed me immensely I
can't think what the foolish fellow means. Tom Loring's going."

"Tom--Loring--going?" she exclaimed with a punctuated pause between
every word. "What in the world for?"

"What is the ultimate cause of everything that happens to us now?" he
asked, sticking his glass in his eye.

Adela felt as though she were playing at some absurd game of questions
and answers, and must make her reply according to the rules.

"Oh, Mr. Ruston!" she said, with a grimace.

Her visitor nodded--as though he had been answered according to the
rules.

"Tom broke out in the most extraordinary manner. He said he couldn't
stay with Dennison, if Dennison let Ruston lead him by the nose
(_ipsissima verba_, my dear Adela), and told Ruston to his face that he
came for no good."

"Were you there?"

"Yes. The man seemed to choose the most public opportunity. Did you ever
hear such a thing?"

"He's mad about Mr. Ruston. He talked just the same way to me. What did
Harry Dennison say?"

"Harry went up to him and took his hand, and shook it, and, you know old
Harry's way, tried to smooth it all down, and get them to shake hands.
Then Ruston got up and said he'd go and leave them to settle it between
Tom and him. Oh, Ruston behaved very well. It was uncommonly awkward for
him, you know."

"Yes; and when he'd gone?"

"Harry told Tom that he must keep his engagements; but that, sooner than
lose him, he'd go no deeper. That was pretty handsome, I thought, but it
didn't suit Tom. 'I can't stay in the house while that fellow comes,' he
said."

"While he comes to the house?" cried Adela.

Lord Semingham nodded. "You've hit the point," he seemed to say, and he
went on,

"And then they both turned and looked at Maggie Dennison. She'd been
sitting there without speaking a single word the whole time. I couldn't
go--Harry wouldn't let me--so I got into a corner and looked at the
photograph book. I felt rather an ass, between ourselves, you know."

"And what did Maggie say?"

"Harry was looking as puzzled as an owl, and Tom as obstinate as a toad,
and both stared at her. She looked first at Harry, and then at Tom, and
smiled in that quiet way of hers. By the way, I never feel that I quite
understand----"

"Oh, never mind! Of course you don't. Go on."

"And then she said, 'What a fuss! I hope that after all this Omofaga
business is over Mr. Loring will come back to us.' Pretty straight for
Tom, eh? He turned crimson, and walked right out of the room, and she
sat down at the piano and began to play some infernal tune, and that
soft-hearted old baby, Harry, blew his nose, and damned the draught."

"And he's going?"

"Yes."

"But," she broke out, "how can he? He's got no money. What'll he live
on?"

"Harry offered him as much as he wanted; but he said he had some
savings, and wouldn't take a farthing. He said he'd write for papers, or
some such stuff."

"He's been with the Dennisons ever since--oh, years and years! Can't you
take him? He'd be awfully useful to you."

"My dear girl, I can't offer charity to Tom Loring," said Semingham, and
he added quickly, "No more can you, you know."

"I quarrelled with him desperately a week ago," said she mournfully.

"About Ruston?"

"Oh, yes. About Mr. Ruston, of course."

Lord Semingham whistled gently, and, after a pause, Adela leant forward
and asked,

"Do you feel quite comfortable about it?"

"Hang it, no! But I'm too deep in. I hope to heaven the public will
swallow it!"

"I didn't mean your wretched Company."

"Oh, you didn't?"

"No; I meant Curzon Street."

"It hardly lies in my mouth to blame Dennison, or his wife either. If
they've been foolish, so have I." Adela looked at him as if she thought
him profoundly unsatisfactory. He was vaguely conscious of her
depreciation, and added, "Ruston's not a rogue, you know."

"No. If I thought he was, I shouldn't be going to take shares in
Omofaga."

"You're not?"

"Oh, but I am!"

"Another spinster lady on my conscience! I shall certainly end in the
dock!" Lord Semingham took his hat and shook hands. Just as he got to
the door, he turned round, and, with an expression of deprecating
helplessness, fired a last shot. "Ruston came to see Bessie the other
day," he said. "The new mantle she's just invented is to be called--the
Omofaga: That is unless she changes it because of the moor. I suggested
the _Pis-aller_, but she didn't see it. She never does, you know.
Good-bye."

The moment he was gone, Adela put on her hat and drove to Curzon Street.
She found Mrs. Dennison alone, and opened fire at once.

"What have you done, Maggie?" she cried, flinging her gloves on the
table and facing her friend with accusing countenance.

Mrs. Dennison was smelling a rose; she smelt it a little longer, and
then replied with another question.

"Why can't men hate quietly? They must make a fuss. I can go on hating a
woman for years and never show it."

"We have the vices of servility," said Adela.

"Harry is a melancholy sight," resumed Mrs. Dennison. "He spends his
time looking for the blotting-paper; Tom Loring used to keep it, you
know."

Her tone deepened the expression of disapproval on Adela's face.

"I've never been so distressed about anything in my life," said she.

"Oh, my dear, he'll come back." As she spoke, a sudden mischievous smile
spread over her face. "You should hear Berthe Cormack on it!" she said.

"I don't want to hear Mrs. Cormack at all. I hate the woman--and I think
that I--at any rate--show it."

It surprised Adela to find her friend in such excellent spirits. The air
of listlessness, which was apt to mar her manner, and even to some
degree her appearance (for to look bored is not becoming), had entirely
vanished.

"You don't seem very sorry about poor Mr. Loring," Adela observed.

"Oh, I am; but Mr. Loring can't stop the wheels of the world. And it's
his own fault."

Adela sighed. It did not seem of consequence whose fault it was.

"I don't think I care much about the wheels of the world," she said.
"How are the children, Maggie?"

"Oh, splendid, and in great glee about the seaside"--and Mrs. Dennison
laughed.

"And about losing Tom Loring?"

"They cried at first."

"Does anyone ever do anything more than 'cry at first'?" exclaimed
Adela.

"Oh, my dear, don't be tragical, or cynical, or whatever you are being,"
said Maggie pettishly. "Mr. Loring has chosen to be very silly, and
there's an end of it. Have you seen the prospectus? Do you know Mr.
Ruston brought it to show me before it was submitted to Mr. Belford and
the others--the Board, I mean?"

"I think you see quite enough of Mr. Ruston," said Adela, putting up her
glass and examining Mrs. Dennison closely. She spoke coolly, but with a
nervous knowledge of her presumption.

Mrs. Dennison may have had a taste for diplomacy and the other arts of
government, but she was no diplomatist. She thought herself gravely
wronged by Adela's suggestion, and burst out angrily,

"Oh, you've been listening to Tom Loring!" and her heightened colour
seemed not to agree with the idea that, if Adela had listened, Tom had
talked of nothing but Omofaga. "I don't mind it from Berthe," Mrs.
Dennison continued, "but from you it's too bad. I suppose he told you
the whole thing? I declare I wasn't dreaming of anything of the kind; I
was just excited, and----"

"I haven't seen Mr. Loring," put in Adela as soon as she could.

"Then how do you know----?"

"Lord Semingham told me you quarrelled with Mr. Loring about Omofaga."

"Is that all?"

"Yes. Maggie, was there any more?"

"Do you want to quarrel with me too?"

"I believe Mr. Loring had good reasons."

"You must believe what you like," said Mrs. Dennison, tearing her rose
to pieces. "Yes, there was some more."

"What?" asked Adela, expecting to be told to mind her own business.

Mrs. Dennison flung away the rose and began to laugh.

"He found me holding Willie Ruston's hand and telling him I--liked
Omofaga! That's all."

"Holding his hand!" exclaimed Adela, justifiably scandalised and
hopelessly puzzled. "What did you do that for?"

"I don't know," said Mrs. Dennison. "It happened somehow as we were
talking. We got interested, you know."

Adela's next question was also one at which it was possible to take
offence; but she was careless now whether offence were taken or not.

"Are you and the children going to the seaside soon?"

"Oh, yes," rejoined her friend, still smiling. "We shall soon be deep in
pails and spades and bathing, and buckets and paddling, and a final
charming walk with Harry in the moonlight."

As the sentence went on, the smile became more fixed and less pleasant.

"You ought to be ashamed to talk like that," said Adela.

Mrs. Dennison walked up the room and down again.

"So I am," she said, pausing to look down on Adela, and then resuming
her walk.

"I wish to goodness this Omofaga affair--yes, and Mr. Ruston too--had
never been invented. It seems to set us all wrong."

"Wrong!" cried Mrs. Dennison. "Oh, yes, if it's wrong to have something
one can take a little interest in!"

"You're hopeless to-day, Maggie. I shall go away. What did you take his
hand for?"

"Nothing. I tell you I was excited."

"Well, I think he's a man one ought to keep cool with."

"Oh, he's cool enough. He'll keep you cool."

"But he didn't----"

"Oh, don't--pray don't!" cried Mrs. Dennison.

Adela took her leave; and, as luck would have it, opened the door just
as Tom Loring was walking downstairs with an enormous load of dusty
papers in his hands. She pulled the door close behind her hastily,
exclaiming,

"Why, I thought you'd gone!"

"So you've heard? I'm just putting things shipshape. I go this evening."

"Well, I'm sorry--still, for your sake, I'm glad."

"Why?"

"You may do something on your own account now."

"I don't want to do anything," said Tom obstinately.

"Come and see me some day. I've forgiven you, you know."

"So I will."

"Mr. Loring, are you going to say good-bye to Maggie?"

"I don't know. I suppose so." Then he added, detecting Adela's
unexpressed hope, "Oh, it's not a bit of use, you know."

Adela passed on, and, later, Loring, having finished his work and being
about to go, sought out Mrs. Dennison.

"You're determined to go, are you?" she asked, with the air of one who
surrenders before an inexplicable whim.

"Yes," said Tom. "You know I must go."

"Why?"

"I'm not a saint--nor a rogue; if I were either, I might stay."

"Or even if you were a sensible man," suggested Maggie Dennison.

"Being merely an honest man, I think I'll go. I've tried to put all
Harry's things right for him, and to make it as easy for him to get
along as I can."

"Can he find his papers and blue-books and things?"

"Oh, yes; and I got abstracts ready on all the things he cares about."

"He'll miss you horribly. Ah, well!"

"I suppose a little; but, really, I think he'll learn to get along----"

Mrs. Dennison interrupted with a laugh.

"Do you know," she asked, "what we remind me of? Why, of a husband and
wife separating, and wondering whether the children will miss poor
papa--though poor papa insists in going, and mamma is sure he must."

"I never mentioned the children," said Tom angrily.

"I know you didn't."

Tom looked at her for an instant.

"For God's sake," said he, "don't let him see that!"

"Oh, how you twist things!" she cried in impatient protest.

Tom only shook his head. The charge was not sincere.

"Good-bye, Tom," she went on after a pause. "I believe, some day or
other, you'll come back--or, at any rate, come and live next
door--instead of Berthe Cormack, you know. But I don't know in what
state you'll find us."

"I'd just like to tell you one thing, if I may," said Tom, resolutely
refusing to meet the softened look in her eyes with any answering
friendliness.

"Yes?"

"You've got one of the best fellows in the world for a husband."

"Well, I know that, I suppose, at least, as well as you do."

"That's all. Good-bye."

Without more he left her. She drew the window-curtain aside and watched
him get into his cab and be driven away. The house was very still. Her
husband was in his place at Westminster, and the children had gone to a
party. She went upstairs to the nursery, hoping to find something to
criticise; then to Harry's dressing-room, where she filled his
pin-cushion with pins and put fresh water to the flowers in the vase.
She could find no other offices of wife or mother to do, and she
presently found herself looking into Tom's room, which was very bare and
desolate, stripped of the homelike growth of a five years' tenancy. Her
excitement was over; she felt terribly like a child after a tantrum; she
flung open the window of the room and stood listening to the noise of
the town. It was the noise of happy people, who had plenty to do; or of
happier still, who did not want to do anything, and thus found content.
She turned away and walked downstairs with a step as heavy as physical
weariness brings with it. It came as a curious aggravation--light
itself, but gaining weight from its surroundings--that, for once in a
way, she had no engagements that evening. All the tide seemed to be
flowing by, leaving her behind high and dry on the shore. Even the
children had their party, even Harry his toy at Westminster; and Willie
Ruston was working might and main to give a good start to Omofaga. Only
of her had the world no need--and no heed.




                             CHAPTER VIII.

                         CONVERTS AND HERETICS.


Had Lord Semingham and Harry Dennison taken an opportunity which many
persons would have thought that they had a right to take, they might
have shifted the burden of the Baron's _douceur_ and of sundry other not
trifling expenses on to the shoulders of the public, and enjoyed their
moors that year after all; for at the beginning Omofaga obtained such a
moderate and reasonable "boom" as would have enabled them to perform the
operation known as "unloading" (and literary men must often admire the
terse and condensed expressiveness of "City" metaphors) with much profit
to themselves. But either they conceived this course of conduct to be
beneath them, or they were so firm of faith in Mr. Ruston that they
stood to their guns and their shares, and took their seats at the Board,
over which Mr. Foster Belford magniloquently presided, still possessed
of the strongest personal interest in the success of Omofaga. Lady
Semingham, having been made aware that Omofaga shares were selling at
forty shillings a piece, was quite unable to understand why Alfred and
Mr. Dennison did not sell all they had, and thereby procure moors or
whatever else they wanted. Willie Ruston had to be sent for again, and
when he told her that the same shares would shortly be worth five pounds
(which he did with the most perfect confidence), she was equally at a
loss to see why they were on sale to anybody who chose to pay forty
shillings. Ruston, who liked to make everybody a convert to his own
point of view, spent the best part of an afternoon conversing with the
little lady, but, when he came away, he left her placidly admiring the
Omofaga mantle which had just arrived from the milliner's, and promised
to create an immense sensation.

"I believe she's all gown," said he despairingly, at the Valentines in
the evening. "If you undressed her there'd be no one there."

"Well, there oughtn't to be many people," said young Sir Walter, with a
hearty laugh at his boyish joke.

"Walter, how can you!" cried Marjory.

This little conversation, trivial though it be, has its importance, as
indicating the very remarkable change which had occurred in young Sir
Walter. There at least Ruston had made a notable convert, and he had
effected this result by the simple but audacious device of offering to
take Sir Walter with him to Omofaga. Sir Walter was dazzled. Between
spending another year or two at Oxford _in statu pupillari_, vexed by
schools and disciplined by proctors--between being required to be in by
twelve at night and unable to visit London without permission--between
this unfledged state and the position of a man among the men who were in
the vanguard of the empire there rolled a flood; and the flood was
mighty enough to sweep away all young Sir Walter's doubts about Mr.
Ruston being a gentleman, to obliterate Evan Haselden's sneers, to
uproot his influence--in a word, to transform that youthful legislator
from a paragon of wisdom and accomplishments into "a good chap, but
rather a lot of side on, you know."

Marjory, having learnt from literature that hers was supposed to be the
fickle sex, might well open her eyes and begin to feel very sorry indeed
for poor Evan Haselden. But she also was under the spell and hailed the
sun of glory rising for her brother out of the mists of Omofaga; and if
poor Lady Valentine shed some tears before Willie Ruston convinced her
of the rare chance it was for her only boy--and a few more after he had
so convinced her--why, it would be lucky if these were the only tears
lost in the process of developing Omofaga; for it seems that great
enterprises must always be watered by the tears of mothers and nourished
on the blood of sons. _Sic fortis Etruria crevit._

One or two other facts may here be chronicled about Omofaga. There were
three great meetings: one at the Cannon Street Hotel, purely commercial;
another at the Westminster Town Hall, commercial-political; a third at
Exeter Hall, commercial-religious. They were all very successful, and,
taken together, were considered to cover the ground pretty completely.
The most unlike persons and the most disparate views found a point of
union in Omofaga. Adela Ferrars put three thousand pounds into it, Lady
Valentine a thousand. Mr. Carlin finally disposed of the coal business,
and his wife dreamt of the workhouse all night and scolded herself for
her lack of faith all the morning. Willie Ruston spoke of being off in
five months, and Sir Walter immediately bought a complete up-country
outfit.

Suddenly there was a cloud. Omofaga began to be "written down," in the
most determined and able manner. The anonymous detractor--in such terms
did Mr. Foster Belford refer to the writer--used the columns of a
business paper of high standing, and his letters, while preserving a
judicial and temperate tone, were uncompromisingly hostile and
exceedingly damaging. A large part of Omofaga (he said) had not been
explored, indeed, nobody knew exactly what was and what was not Omofaga;
let the shareholders get what comfort they could out of that; but, so
far as Omofaga had been explored, it had been proved to be barren of all
sources of wealth. The writer grudgingly admitted that it might feed a
certain head of cattle, though he hastened to add that the flies were
fatal all the hot months; but as for gold, or diamonds, or any such
things as companies most love, there were none, and if there were, they
could not be won, and if they could be won no European could live to win
them. It was a timid time on the markets then, and people took fright
easily. In a few days any temptation that might have assailed Lord
Semingham and Harry Dennison lost its power. Omofagas were far below
par, and Lady Semingham was entreating her husband to buy all he could
against the hour when they should be worth five pounds a piece, because,
as she said, Mr. Ruston was quite sure that they were going to be, and
who knew more about it than Mr. Ruston?

It was just about this time that Tom Loring, who had vanished completely
for a week or two, after his departure from Curzon Street, came up out
of the depths and called on Adela Ferrars in Queen's Gate; and her first
remark showed that she was a person of some perspicacity.

"Isn't this rather small of you?" she asked, putting on her eyeglasses
and finding an article which she indicated. "You may not like him, but
still----"

"How like a woman!" said Tom Loring in the tone of a man who expects
and, on the whole, welcomes ill-usage. "How did you know it was mine?"

"It's so like that article of Harry Dennison's. I think you might put
your name, anyhow."

"Yes, and rob what I say of all weight. Who knows my name?"

Adela felt an impulse to ask him angrily why nobody knew his name, but
she inquired instead what he thought he knew about Omofaga. She put this
question in a rather offensive tone.

It appeared that Tom Loring knew a great deal about Omofaga, all, in
fact, that there was to be learnt from blue-books, consular reports,
gazetteers, travels, and other heavy works of a like kind.

"You've been moling in the British Museum," cried Adela accusingly.

Tom admitted it without the least shame.

"I knew this thing was a fraud and the man a fraud, and I determined to
show him up if I could," said he.

"It's because you hate him."

"Then it's lucky for the British investor that I do hate him."

"It's not lucky for me," said Adela.

"You don't mean to say you've been----"

"Fool enough? Yes, I have. No, don't quarrel again. It won't ruin me,
anyhow. Are the things you say really true?"

Tom replied by another question.

"Do you think I'd write 'em if I didn't believe they were?"

"No, but you might believe they were because you hate him."

Tom seemed put out at this idea. It is not one that generally suggests
itself to a man when his own views are in question.

"I admit I began because I hate him," he said, with remarkable candour,
after a moment's consideration; "but, by Jove, as I went on I found
plenty of justification. Look here, you mustn't tell anyone I'm writing
them."

Tom looked a little embarrassed as he made this request.

Adela hesitated for a moment. She did not like the request, either.

"No, I won't," she said at last; and she added, "I'm beginning to think
I hate him, too. He's turning me into an hospital."

"What?"

"People he wounds come to me. Old Lady Valentine came and cried because
Walter's going to Omofaga; and Evan came and--well, swore because Walter
worships Mr. Ruston; and Harry Dennison came and looked bewildered,
and--you know--because--oh, because of you, and so on."

"And now I come, don't I?"

"Yes, and now you."

"And has Mrs. Dennison come?" asked Tom, with a look of disconcerting
directness.

"No," snapped Adela, and she looked at the floor, whereupon Tom diverted
his eyes from her and stared at the ceiling.

Presently he searched in his waistcoat pocket and brought out a little
note.

"Read that," he said, a world of disgust in his tone.

"'I told you so.--B.C.'" read Adela. "Oh, it's that Cormack woman!" she
cried.

"You see what it means? She means I've been got rid of in order
that----" Tom stopped, and brought his clenched fist down on his opened
palm. "If I thought it, I'd shoot the fellow," he ended.

He looked at her for the answer to his unexpressed question.

Adela turned the pestilential note over and over in her fingers,
handling it daintily as though it might stain.

"I don't think he means it," she said at last, without trying to blink
the truth of Tom's interpretation.

Tom rose and began to walk about.

"Women beat me," he broke out. "I don't understand 'em. How should I?
I'm not one of these fellows who catch women's fancy--thank God!"

"If you continue to dislike the idea, you'll probably manage to escape
the reality," observed Adela, and her tone, for some reason or
other--perhaps merely through natural championship of her sex--was
rather cold and her manner stiff.

"Oh, some women are all right;" and Adela acknowledged the concession
with a satirical bow. "Look here, can't you help?" he burst out. "Tell
her what a brute he is."

"Oh, you do not understand women!"

"Well, then, I shall tell Dennison. He won't stand nonsense of that
kind."

"You'll deserve horsewhipping if you do," remarked Adela.

"Then what am I to do?"

"Nothing. In fact, Mr. Loring, you have no genius for delicate
operations."

"Of course I'm a fool."

Adela played with her _pince-nez_ for a minute or two, put it on, looked
at him, and then said, with just a touch of unwonted timidity in her
voice,

"Anyhow, you happen to be a gentleman."

Poor Tom had been a good deal buffeted of late, and a friendly stroking
was a pleasant change. He looked up with a smile, but as he looked up
Adela looked away.

"I think I'll stop those articles," said he.

"Yes, do," she cried, a bright smile on her face.

"They've pretty well done their work, too."

"Don't! Don't spoil it! But--but don't you get money for them?"

Tom was in better humour now. He held out his hand with his old friendly
smile.

"Oh, wait till I am in the workhouse, and then you shall take me out."

"I don't believe I did mean that," protested Adela.

"You always mean everything that--that the best woman in the world could
mean," and Tom wrung her hand and disappeared.

Adela's hand was rather crushed and hurt, and for a moment she stood
regarding it ruefully.

"I thought he was going to kiss it," she said. "One of those fellows who
take women's fancy, perhaps, would have! And--and it wouldn't have hurt
so much. Ah, well, I'm very glad he's going to stop the articles."

And the articles did stop; and perhaps things might have fallen out
worse than that an honest man, driven hard by bitterness, should do a
useful thing from a doubtful motive, and having done just enough of it,
should repent and sin no more; for unquestionably the articles prevented
a great many persons from paying an unduly high price for Omofaga
shares. This line of thought seems defensible, but it was not Adela's.
She rejoiced purely that Tom should turn away from the doubtful thing;
and if Tom had been a man of greater acuteness, it would have struck him
as worthy of note, perhaps even of gratification, that Miss Adela
Ferrars should care so much whether he did or did not do doubtful
things. But then Miss Ferrars--for it seems useless to keep her secret
any longer, the above recorded interview having somewhat impaired its
mystery--was an improbably romantic person--such are to be met even at
an age beyond twenty-five--and was very naturally ashamed of her
weakness. People often are ashamed of being better than their
surroundings. Being better they feel better, and feeling better they
feel priggish, and then they try not to be better, and happily fail. So
Adela was very shamefaced over her ideal, and would as soon have thought
of preaching on a platform--of which practice she harboured a most
bigoted horror--as of proclaiming the part that love must play in her
marriage. The romantic resolve lay snug in its hidden nest, sheltered
from cold gusts of ridicule by a thick screen of worldly sayings, and,
when she sent away a suitor, of worldly-wise excuses. Thus no one
suspected it, not even Tom Loring, although he thought her "the best of
women;" a form of praise, by the way, that gave the lady honoured by it
less pleasure than less valuable commendation might have done. Why best?
Why not most charming? Well, probably because he thought the one and
didn't think the other. She was the best; but there was another whose
doings and whose peril had robbed Tom Loring of his peace, and made him
do the doubtful thing. Why had he done it? Or (and Adela smiled
mockingly at this resurrection of the Old Woman), if he did do it, why
did he do it for Maggie Dennison? She didn't believe he would ever do a
doubtful thing for her. For that she loved him; but perhaps she would
have loved him--well, not less--if he did; for how she would forgive
him!

After half-an-hour of this kind of thing--it was her own summary of her
meditations--she dressed, went out to dinner, sat next Evan Haselden,
and said cynical things all the evening; so that, at last Evan told her
that she had no more feeling than a mummified Methodist. This was
exactly what she wanted.




                              CHAPTER IX.

                        AN OPPRESSIVE ATMOSPHERE.


The Right Honourable Foster Belford, although not, like Mr. Pitt, famous
for "ruining Great Britain gratis"--perhaps merely from want of the
opportunity--had yet not made a fortune out of political life, and it
had suggested a pleasant addition to his means, when Willie Ruston
offered him the chairmanship of the Omofaga Company, with the promise of
a very comfortable yearly honorarium. He accepted the post with
alacrity, but without undue gratitude, for he considered himself well
worth the price; and the surprising fact is that he was well worth it.
He bulked large to the physical and mental view. His colleagues in the
Cabinet had taken a year or two to find out his limits, and the public
had not found them out yet. Therefore he was not exactly a fool. On the
other hand, the limits were certainly there, and so there was no danger
of his developing an inconvenient greatness. As has been previously
hinted, he enjoyed Harry Dennison's entire confidence; and he could be
relied upon not to understand Lord Semingham's irreverence. Thus his
appointment did good to the Omofaga as well as to himself, and only the
initiated winked when Willie Ruston hid himself behind this imposing
figure and pulled the strings.

"The best of it is," Ruston remarked to Semingham, "that you and Carlin
will have the whole thing in your own hands when I've gone out. Belford
won't give you any trouble."

"But, my dear fellow, I don't want it all in my hands. I want to grow
rich out of it without any trouble."

Ruston twisted his cigar in his mouth. The prospect of immediate wealth
flowing in from Omofaga was, as Lord Semingham knew very well, not
assured.

"Loring's stopped hammering us," said Ruston; "that's one thing."

"Oh, you found out he wrote them?"

"Yes; and uncommonly well he did it, confound him. I wish we could get
that fellow. There's a good deal in him."

"You see," observed Lord Semingham, "he doesn't like you. I don't know
that you went the right way about to make him."

The remark sounded blunt, but Semingham had learnt not to waste delicate
phrases on Willie Ruston.

"Well, I didn't know he was worth the trouble."

"One path to greatness is said to be to make no enemies."

"A very roundabout one, I should think. I'm going to make a good many
enemies in Omofaga."

Lord Semingham suddenly rose, put on his hat, and left the offices of
the Company. Mrs. Dennison had, a little while ago, complained to him
that she ate, drank, breathed and wore Omofaga. He had detected the
insincerity of her complaint, but he was becoming inclined to echo it in
all genuineness on his own account. There were moments when he wondered
how and why he had allowed this young man to lead him so far and so
deep; moments when a convulsion of Nature, redistributing Africa and
blotting out Omofaga, would have left him some thousands of pounds
poorer in purse, but appreciably more cheerful in spirit. Perhaps
matters would mend when the Local Administrator had departed to his
local administration, and only the mild shadow of him which bore the
name of Carlin trod the boards of Queen Street, Cheapside. Ruston began
to be oppressive. The restless energy and domineering mind of the man
wearied Semingham's indolent and dilettante spirit, and he hailed the
end of the season as an excellent excuse for putting himself beyond the
reach of his colleague for a few weeks. Yet, the more he quailed, the
more he trusted; and when a very great man, holding a very great office,
met him in the House of Lords, and expressed the opinion that when the
Company and Mr. Ruston went to Omofaga they would find themselves in a
pretty hornets' nest, Lord Semingham only said that he should be sorry
for the hornets.

"Don't ask us to fetch your man out for you, that's all," said the very
great man.

And for an instant Lord Semingham, still feeling that load upon his
shoulders, fancied that it would be far from his heart to prefer such a
request. There might be things less just and fitting than that Willie
Ruston and those savage tribes of Omofaga should be left to fight out
the quarrel by themselves, the civilised world standing aloof. And the
dividends--well, of course, there were the dividends, but Lord Semingham
had in his haste forgotten them.

"Ah, you don't know Ruston," said he, shaking a forefinger at the great
man.

"Don't I? He came every day to my office for a fortnight."

"Wanted something?"

"Yes, he wanted something certainly, or he wouldn't have come, you
know."

"Got it, I suppose?" asked Lord Semingham, in a tone curiously
indicative of resignation rather than triumph.

"Well, yes; I did, at last, not without hesitation, accede to his
request."

Then Lord Semingham, with no apparent excuse, laughed in the face of the
great man, left the House (much in the same sudden way as he had left
Queen Street, Cheapside), and passed rapidly through the lobbies till he
reached Westminster Hall. Here he met a young man, clad to perfection,
but looking sad. It was Evan Haselden. With a sigh of relief at meeting
no one of heavier metal, Semingham stopped him and began to talk. Evan's
melancholy air enveloped his answers in a mist of gloom. Moreover there
was a large streak on his hat, where the nap had been rubbed the wrong
way; evidently he was in trouble. Presently he seized his friend by the
arm, and proposed a walk in the Park.

"But are you paired?" asked Semingham; for an important division was to
occur that day in the Commons.

"No," said Evan fiercely. "Come along;" and Lord Semingham went,
exclaiming inwardly, "A girl!"

"I'm the most miserable devil alive," said Evan, as they left the Horse
Guards on the right hand.

Semingham put up his eyeglass.

"I've always regarded you as the favourite of fortune," he said. "What's
the matter?"

The matter unfolded itself some half-hour after they had reached the Row
and sat down. It came forth with difficulty; pride obstructed the
passage, and something better than pride made the young man diffuse in
the telling of his trouble. Lord Semingham grew very grave indeed. Let
who would laugh at happy lovers, he had a groan for the unfortunate--a
groan with reservations.

"She said she liked me very much, but didn't feel--didn't, you know,
look up to me enough, and so on," said poor Evan in puzzled pain. "I--I
can't think what's come over her. She used to be quite different. I
don't know what she means by talking like that."

Lord Semingham played a tune on his knee with the fingers of one hand.
He was waiting.

"Young Val's gone back on me too," moaned Evan, who took the brother's
deposal of him hardly more easily than the sister's rejection. Suddenly
he brightened up; a smile, but a bitter one, gleamed across his face.

"I think I've put one spoke in his wheel, though," he said.

"Ruston's?" inquired Semingham, still playing his tune.

"Yes. A fortnight ago, old Detchmore" (Lord Detchmore was the very great
man before referred to) "asked me if I knew Loring. You know Ruston's
been trying to get Detchmore to back him up in making a railway to
Omofaga?"

"I didn't know," said Lord Semingham, with an unmoved face.

"You're a director, aren't you?"

"Yes. Go on, my dear boy."

"And Detchmore had seen Loring's articles. Well, I took Tom to him, and
we left him quite decided to have nothing to do with it. Oh, by Jove,
though, I forgot; I suppose you'd be on the other side there, wouldn't
you?"

"I suppose I should, but it doesn't matter."

"Why not?"

"Because I fancy Ruston's got what he wanted;" and Lord Semingham
related what he had heard from the Earl of Detchmore.

Evan listened in silence, and, the tale ended, the two lay back in their
chairs, and idly looked at the passing carriages. At last Lord Semingham
spoke.

"He's going to Omofaga in a few months," he observed. "And, Evan, you
don't mean that he's your rival at the Valentines'?"

"I'm not so sure, confound him. You know how pretty she is."

Semingham knew that she was pretty; but he also knew that she was poor,
and thought that she was, if not too insipid (for he recognised the
unusual taste of his own mind), at least too immature to carry Willie
Ruston off his feet, and into a love affair that promised no worldly
gain.

"I asked Mrs. Dennison what she thought," pursued Evan.

"Oh, you did?"

"But the idea seemed quite a new one to her. That's good, you know. I
expect she'd have noticed if he'd shown any signs."

Lord Semingham thought it very likely.

"Anyhow," Evan continued, "Marjory's awfully keen about him."

"He'll be in Omofaga in three or four months," Semingham repeated. It
was all the consolation he could offer.

Presently Evan got up and strode away. Lord Semingham sat on, musing on
the strange turmoil the coming of the man had made in the little corner
of the world he dwelt in. He was reminded of what was said concerning
Lord Byron by another poet. They all felt Ruston. His intrusion into the
circle had changed all the currents, so that sympathy ran no longer
between old friends, and hearts answered to a new stimulus. Some he
attracted, some he repelled; none did he leave alone. From great to
small his influence ran; from the expulsion of Tom Loring to the
christening of the Omofaga mantle. Semingham had an acute sense of the
absurdity of it all, but he had seen absurd things happen too often to
be much relieved by his intuition. And when absurd things happen, they
have consequences just as other things have. And the most exasperating
fact was the utter unconsciousness of the disturber. He had no
mystery-airs, no graces, no seeming fascinations. He was relentlessly
business-like, unsentimental, downright; he took it all as a matter of
course. He did not pry for weak spots. He went right on--on and
over--and seemed not to know when he was going over. A very Juggernaut
indeed! Semingham thanked Adela for teaching him the word.

He was suddenly roused by the merry laughter of children. Three or four
little ones were scampering along the path in the height of glee. As
they came up, he recognised them. He had seen them once before. They
were Carlin's children. Five there were, he counted now; three ran
ahead; two little girls held each a hand of Willie Ruston's, who was
laughing as merrily as his companions. The whole group knew Semingham,
and the eldest child was by his knees in a moment.

"We've been to the Exhibition," she cried exultantly; "and now
Willie--Mr. Ruston, I mean--is taking us to have ices in Bond Street."

"A human devil!" said the astonished man to himself, as Willie Ruston
plumped down beside him, imploring a brief halt, and earnestly
asseverating that his request was in good faith, and concealed no
lurking desire to evade the ices.

"I met young Haselden as we came along," Ruston observed, wiping his
brow.

"Ah! Yes, he's been with me."

The children had wandered a few yards off, and stood impatiently looking
at their hero.

"He's had a bit of a facer, I fancy," pursued Willie Ruston. "Heard
about it?"

"Something."

"It'll come all right, I should think," said Ruston, in a comfortably
careless tone. "He's not a bad fellow, you know, though he's not
over-appreciative of me." Lord Semingham found no comment. "I hear
you're going to Dieppe next week?" asked Ruston.

"Yes. My wife and Mrs. Dennison have put their heads together, and fixed
on that. You know we're economising."

Ruston laughed.

"I suppose you are," he said through his white teeth. The idea seemed to
amuse him. "We may meet there. I've promised to run over for a few days
if I can."

"The deuce you have!" would have expressed his companion's feelings; but
Lord Semingham only said, "Oh, really?"

"All right, I'm coming directly," Ruston cried a moment later to his
young friends, and, with a friendly nod, he rose and went on his way.
Lord Semingham watched the party till it disappeared through the Park
gates, hearing in turn the children's shrill laugh and Willie Ruston's
deeper notes. The effect of the chance meeting was to make his fancies
and his fancied feelings look still more absurd. That he perceived at
once; the devil appeared so very human in such a mood and such
surroundings. Yet that attribute--that most demoniac attribute--of
ubiquity loomed larger and larger. For not even a foreign land--not even
a watering-place of pronounced frivolity--was to be a refuge. The man
was coming to Dieppe! And on whose bidding? Semingham had no doubt on
whose bidding; and, out of the airy forms of those absurd fancies, there
seemed to rise a more material shape, a reality, a fabric not compounded
wholly of dreams, but mixed of stuff that had made human comedies and
human tragedies since the world began. Mrs. Dennison had bidden Willie
Ruston to Dieppe. That was Semingham's instant conclusion; she had
bidden him, not merely by a formal invitation, or by a simple
acquiescence, but by the will and determination which possessed her to
be of his mind and in his schemes. And perhaps Evan Haselden's innocent
asking of her views had carried its weight also. For nearly an hour
Semingham sat and mused. For awhile he thought he would act; but how
should he act? And why? And to what end? Since what must be must, and in
vain do we meddle with fate. An easy, almost eager, recognition of the
inevitable in the threatened, of the necessary in everything that
demanded effort for its avoidance, had stamped his life and grown deep
into his mind. Wherefore now, faced with possibilities that set his
nerves on edge, and wrung his heart for good friends, he found nothing
better to do than shrug his shoulders and thank God that his own wife's
submission to the man went no deeper than the inside lining of that
famous Omofaga mantle, nor his own than the bottom, or near the bottom,
of his trousers' pocket.

"Though that, in faith," he exclaimed ruefully, as at last he rose, "is,
in this world of ours, pretty deep!"




                               CHAPTER X.

                         A LADY'S BIT OF WORK.


The Dennison children, after a two nights' banishment, had come down to
dessert again. They had been in sore disgrace, caused (it was stated to
Mrs. Cormack, who had been invited to dine _en famille_) by a grave
breach of hospitality and good manners which Madge had led the younger
ones--who tried to look plaintively innocent--into committing.

The Carlin children had come to tea, and a great dissension had arisen
between the two parties. The Carlins had belauded the generous donor of
ices; Madge had taken up the cudgels fiercely on Tom Loring's behalf,
and Dora and Alfred had backed her up. Each side proceeded from praise
of its own favourite to sneers--by no means covert--at the other's man,
and the feud had passed from the stage of words to that of deeds before
it was discovered by the superior powers and crushed. On the hosts, of
course, the blame had to fall; they were sent to bed, while the guests
drove off in triumph, comforted by sweets and shillings. Madge did not
think, or pretend to think, that this was justice, and her mother's
recital of her crimes to Mrs. Cormack, so far from reducing her to
penitence, brought back to her cheeks and eyes the glow they had worn
when she slapped (there is no use in blinking facts) Jessie Carlin, and
told her that she hated Mr. Ruston. Madge Dennison was like her mother
in face and temper. That may have been the reason why Harry Dennison
squeezed her hand under the table, and by his tacit aid broke the force
of his wife's cold reproofs. But there was perhaps another reason also.

Mrs. Cormack said that she was shocked, and looked very much amused. The
little history made up for the bore of having the children brought in.
That was a thing she objected to very much; it stopped all rational
conversation. But now her curiosity was stirred.

"Why don't you like Mr. Ruston, my child?" she asked Madge.

"I don't dislike him," said Madge, rosy red, and speaking with elaborate
slowness. She said it as though it were a lesson she had learnt.

"But why, then," said Mrs. Cormack, whirling her hands, "beat the little
Carlin?"

"That was before mamma told me," answered Madge, the two younger ones
sitting by, open-mouthed, to hear her explanation.

"Oh, what an obedient child! How I should have liked a little girl like
you, darling!"

Madge hated sarcasm, and her feelings towards Mrs. Cormack reflected
those of her idol, Tom Loring.

"I don't know what you mean," she said curtly; and then she looked
anxiously at her mother.

But Mrs. Dennison was smiling.

"Let her alone, Berthe," she said. "She's been punished. Give her some
fruit, Harry."

Harry Dennison piled up the plate eagerly held out to him.

"Who'll give you fruit at Dieppe?" he asked, stroking his daughter's
hair.

Mrs. Cormack pricked up her ears.

"Didn't we tell you?" asked Mrs. Dennison. "Harry can't come for a
fortnight. That tiresome old Sir George" (Sir George was the senior
partner in Dennison, Sons & Company) "is down with the gout, and Harry's
got to stay in town. But I'll give Madge fruit--if she's good."

"Papa gives it me anyhow," said Madge, who preferred unconditional
benefits.

Harry laughed dolefully. He had been looking forward to a holiday with
his children. Their uninterrupted society would have easily consoled him
for the loss of the moor.

"It's an awful bore," he said; "but there's no help for it. Sir George
can't put a foot to the ground."

"Anyhow," suggested Mrs. Cormack, "you will be able to help Mr. Ruston
with the Omofaga."

"Papa," broke out Madge, her face bright with a really happy idea, which
must, she thought, meet with general acceptance, "since you can't come,
why shouldn't Tom?"

Mrs. Cormack grew more amused. Oh, it was quite worth while to have the
children! They were so good at saying things one couldn't say oneself;
and then one could watch the effect. In an impulse of gratitude, she
slid a banana on to Madge's plate.

"Marjory Valentine's coming," said Mrs. Dennison. "You like her, don't
you, Madge?"

"She's a girl," said Madge scornfully; and Harry, with a laugh, stroked
her hair again.

"You're a little flirt," said he.

"But why can't Tom?" persisted Madge, as she attacked the banana. It was
Mrs. Cormack's gift, but--_non olet_.

For a moment nobody answered. Then Harry Dennison said--not in the least
as though he believed it, or expected anybody else to believe it--

"Tom's got to stay and work."

"Have all the gentlemen we know got to stay and work?"

Harry nodded assent.

Mrs. Cormack was leaning forward. A moment later she sank back, hiding a
smile behind her napkin; for Madge observed, in a tone of utter
contentment,

"Oh, then, Mr Ruston won't come;" and she wagged her head reassuringly
at the open-mouthed little ones. They were satisfied, and fell again to
eating.

After a few moments, Mrs. Dennison, who had made no comment on her
daughter's inference, swept the flock off to bed, praying Berthe to
excuse her temporary absence. It was her habit to go upstairs with them
when possible, and Harry would see that coffee came.

"Poor Madge!" said Harry, when the door was shut, "what'll she say when
Ruston turns up?"

"Then he does go?"

"I think so. We'd asked him to stay with us, and though he can't do that
now, he and young Walter Valentine talk of running over for a few days.
I hope they will."

Mrs. Cormack, playing with her teaspoon, glanced at her host out of the
corner of her eye.

"He can go all the better, as I shall be here," continued Harry. "I can
look after Omofaga."

Mrs. Cormack rapped the teaspoon sharply on her cup. The man was such a
fool. Harry, dimly recognising her irritation, looked up inquiringly;
but she hesitated before she spoke. Would it spoil sport or make sport
if she stirred a suspicion in him? A thought threw its weight in the
balance. Maggie Dennison's friendship had been a trifle condescending,
and the grateful friend pictured her under the indignity of enforced
explanations, of protests, even of orders to alter her conduct. But how
would Harry take a hint? There were men silly enough to resent such
hints. Caution was the word.

"Well, I almost wish he wasn't going," she said at last. "For Maggie's
sake, I mean. She wants a complete rest."

"Oh, but she likes him. He amuses her. Why, she's tremendously
interested in Omofaga, Mrs. Cormack."

"Ah, but he excites her too. We poor women have nerves, Mr. Dennison. It
would be much better for her to hear nothing of Omofaga for a few
weeks."

"Has she been talking to you much about it?" asked Harry, beginning to
feel anxious at his guest's immensely solemn tone.

Indeed, little Mrs. Cormack spoke for the nonce quite like a family
physician.

"Oh, yes, about it and him," she replied. "She's never off the subject.
Mr. Loring was half right."

"Tom's objections were based on quite other grounds."

"Oh, were they really? I thought--well, anyhow, Mr. Ruston being there
will do her no good. She'll like it immensely, of course."

Harry Dennison rubbed his hand over his chin.

"I see what you mean," he said. "Yes, she'd have been better away from
everything. But I can't object to Ruston going. I asked him myself."

"Yes, when you were going."

"That makes no difference."

Mrs. Cormack said nothing. She tapped her spoon against the cup once
more.

"Why, we should have talked all the more about it if I'd been there."

His companion was still silent, her eyes turned down towards the table.
Harry looked at her with perplexity, and when he next spoke, there was a
curious appealing note in his voice.

"Surely it doesn't make any difference?" he asked. "What difference can
it make?"

No answer came. Mrs. Cormack laid down the spoon and sat back in her
chair.

"You mean there'll be no one to make a change for her--to distract her
thoughts?"

Mrs. Cormack flung her hands out with an air of impatience.

"Oh, I meant nothing," said she petulantly.

The clock seemed to tick very loud in the silence that followed her
words.

"I wish I could go," said Harry at last, in a low tone.

"Oh, I wish you could, Mr. Dennison;" and as she spoke she raised her
eyes, and, for the first time, looked full in his face.

Harry rose from his chair; at the same moment his wife re-entered the
room. He started a little at the sight of her.

She held a letter in her hand.

"Mr. Ruston will be at Dieppe on the 15th with Walter Valentine," she
said, referring to it. "Give me some coffee, Harry."

He poured it out and gave it to her, saying,

"A letter from Ruston? Let's see what he says."

"Oh, there's nothing else," she answered, laying it beside her.

Mrs. Cormack sat looking on.

"May I see?" asked Harry Dennison.

"If you like," she answered, a little surprised; and, turning to Mrs.
Cormack, she added, "Mr. Ruston's a man of few words on paper."

"Ah, he makes every word mean something, I expect," returned that lady,
who was quite capable of the same achievement herself, and exhibited it
in this very speech.

"What does he mean by the postscript?--'Have you found another kingdom
yet?'" asked Harry, with a puzzled frown.

"It's a joke, dear."

"But what does it mean?"

"Oh, my dear Harry, I can't explain jokes."

Harry laid the note down again.

"It's a joke between ourselves," Mrs. Dennison went on. "I oughtn't to
have shown you the letter. Come, Berthe, we'll go upstairs."

And Mrs. Cormack had no alternative but to obey.

Left alone, Harry Dennison drew his chair up to the hearthrug. There was
no fire, but he acted as though there were, leaning forward with his
elbows on his knees, and gazing into the grate. He felt hurt and
disconsolate. His old grievance--that people left him out--was strong
upon him. He had delighted in the Omofaga scheme, because he had been in
the inside ring there--because he was of importance to it--because it
showed him to his wife as a mover in great affairs. And now--somehow--he
seemed to be being pushed outside there too. What was this joke between
themselves? At Dieppe they would have all that out; he would not be in
the way there. Then he did not understand what Berthe Cormack would be
at. She had looked at him so curiously. He did not know what to make of
it, and he wished that Tom Loring were on the other side of the
fireplace. Then he could ask him all about it. Tom! Why, Tom had looked
at him almost in the same way as Berthe Cormack had--just when he was
wringing his hand in farewell. No, it was not the same way--and yet in
part the same. Tom's look had pity in it, and no derision. Mrs.
Cormack's derision was but touched with pity. Yet both seemed to ask,
"Don't you see?" See what? Why had Tom gone away? He could rely on Tom.
See what? There was nothing to see.

He sat longer than he meant. It was past ten when he went upstairs. Mrs.
Cormack had gone, and his wife was in an armchair by the open window. He
came in softly and surprised her with her head thrown back on the
cushions and a smile on her lips. And the letter was in her hands.
Hearing his step when he was close by her, she sat up, letting the note
fall to the ground.

"What a time you've been! Berthe's gone. Were you asleep?"

"No. I was thinking; Maggie, I wish I could come to Dieppe with you."

"Ah, I wish you could," said she graciously. "But you're left in charge
of Omofaga."

She spoke as though in that charge lay consolation more than enough.

"I believe you care--I mean you think more about Omofaga than about----"

"Anything in the world?" she asked, in playful mockery.

"Than about me," he went on stubbornly.

"Than about your coming to Dieppe, you mean?"

"I mean, than about me," he repeated.

She looked at him wonderingly.

"My dear man," said she, taking his hand, "what's the matter?"

"You do wish I could come?"

"Must I say?" smiled Mrs. Dennison. "For shame, Harry! You might be on
your honeymoon."

He moved away, and flung himself into a chair.

"I don't think it's fair of Ruston," he broke out, "to run away and
leave it all to me."

"Why, you told him you could do it perfectly! I heard you say so."

"How could I say anything else, when--when----"

"And originally you were both to be away! After all, you're not stopping
because of Omofaga, but because Sir George has got the gout."

Harry Dennison, convicted of folly, had no answer, though he was hurt
that he should be convicted out of his wife's mouth. He shuffled his
feet about and began to whistle dolefully.

Mrs. Dennison looked at him with smothered impatience. Their little boy
behaved like that when he was in a naughty mood--when he wanted the
moon, or something of that kind, and thought mother and nurse cruel
because it didn't come. Mrs. Dennison forgot that mother and nurse were
fate to her little boy, or she might have sympathised with his naughty
moods a little better.

She rose now and walked slowly over to her husband. She had a hand on
his chair, and was about to speak, when he stopped his whistling and
jerked out abruptly,

"What did he mean about the kingdom?"

Mrs. Dennison's hand slid away and fell by her side. Harry caught her
look of cold anger. He leapt to his feet.

"Maggie, I'm a fool," he cried. "I don't know what's wrong with me. Sit
down here."

He made her sit, and half-crouched, half-knelt beside her.

"Maggie," he went on, "are you angry? Damn the joke! I don't want to
know. Are you sorry I'm not coming?"

"What a baby you are, Harry! Oh, yes, awfully sorry."

He knew so well what he wanted to say: he wanted to tell her that she
was everything to him, that to be out of her heart was death: that to
feel her slipping away was a torture: he wanted to woo and win her over
again--win her more truly than he had even in those triumphant days when
she gave herself to him. He wanted to show her that he understood
her--that he was not a fool--that he was man enough for her! Yes, that
she need not turn to Ruston or anybody else. Oh, yes, he could
understand her, really he could.

Not a word of it would come. He dared not begin: he feared that he would
look--that she would find him--more silly still, if he began to say that
sort of thing. She was smiling satirically now--indulgently but
satirically, and the emphasis of her purposely childish "awfully"
betrayed her estimation of his question. She did not understand the
mood. She was accustomed to his admiration--worship would hardly be too
strong a word. But the implied demand for a response to it seemed
strange to her. Her air bore in upon him the utter difference between
his thoughts of her and the way she thought about him. Always dimly
felt, it had never pressed on him like this before.

"Really, I'm very sorry, dear," she said, just a little more seriously.
"But it's only a fortnight. We're not separating for ever," and her
smile broke out again.

With a queer feeling of hopelessness, he rose to his feet. No, he
couldn't make her feel it. He had suffered in the same way over his
speeches; he couldn't make people feel them either. She didn't
understand. It was no use. He began to whistle again, staring out of the
open window.

"I shall go to bed, Harry. I'm tired. I've been seeing that the maid's
packed what I wanted, and it's harder work than packing oneself."

"Give me a kiss, Meg," he said, turning round.

She did not do that, but she accepted his kiss, and he, turning away
abruptly, shaped his lips to resume his tune. But now the tune wouldn't
come. His wife left him alone. The tune came when she was there. Now it
wouldn't. Ah, but the words would. He muttered them inaudibly to himself
as he stood looking out of the window. They sounded as though they must
touch any woman's heart. With an oath he threw himself on to the sofa,
trying now to banish the haunting words--the words that would not come
at his call, and came, in belated uselessness, to mock him now. He lay
still; and they ran through his head. At last they ceased; but, before
he could thank God for that, a strange sense of desolation came over
him. He looked round the empty, silent room, that seemed larger now than
in its busy daylight hours. The house was all still; there might have
been one lying dead in it. It might have been the house of a man who had
lost his wife.




                              CHAPTER XI.

                          AGAINST HIS COMING.


"The great Napoleon once observed----"

"Don't quote from 'Anecdotes, New and Old,'" interrupted Adela unkindly.

"That when his death was announced," pursued Lord Semingham, who thought
it good for Adela to take no notice of such interruptions, "everybody
would say _Ouf_. I say '_Ouf_' now," and he stretched his arms
luxuriously to their full length. "There's room here," he added,
explaining the gesture.

"Well, who's dead?" asked Adela, choosing to be exasperatingly literal.

"Nobody's dead; but a lot of people--and things--are a long way off."

"That's not so satisfactorily final," said Adela.

"No, but it serves for the time. Did you see me on my bicycle this
morning?"

"What, going round here?" and Adela waved her hand circularly, as though
embracing the broad path that runs round the grass by the sea at Dieppe.

"Yes--just behind a charming _Parisienne_ in a pair of--behind a
charming _Parisienne_ in an appropriate costume."

"Bessie must get one," said Adela.

"Good heavens!"

"I mean a bicycle."

"Oh, certainly, if she likes; but she'd as soon mount Salisbury Spire."

"How did you learn?"

"I really beg your pardon," said Semingham, "but the fact is--Ruston
taught me."

"Let's change the subject," said Adela, smiling.

"A charming child, this Marjory Valentine," observed Semingham. "She's
too good for young Evan. I'm very glad she wouldn't have him."

"I'm not."

"You're always sorry other girls don't marry. Heaven knows why."

"Well, I'm sorry she didn't take Evan."

"Why?"

"I can't tell you."

"Not--not the forbidden topic?"

"I half believe so."

"But she's here with Maggie Dennison."

"Well, everybody doesn't chatter as you do," said Adela incisively.

"I don't believe it. She----Hallo! here she is!"

Marjory Valentine came along, bending her slim figure a little, the
better to resist a fresh breeze that blew her skirts out behind her, and
threatened to carry off her broad-brimmed hat. She had been bathing; the
water was warm, and her cheeks glowed with a fine colour. As she came
up, both Adela and Lord Semingham put on their eyeglasses.

"An uncommon pretty girl," observed the latter.

"Isn't it glorious?" cried Marjory, yet several yards away. "Walter will
enjoy the bathing tremendously."

"When's he coming?"

"Saturday," answered Marjory. "Where is Lady Semingham?"

"Dressing," said Semingham solemnly. "Costume number one, off at 11.30.
Costume number two, on at 12. Costume number two, off at 3.30.
Costume----"

"After all, she's your wife," said Adela, in tones of grave reproach.

"But for that, I shouldn't have a word to say against it. Women are very
queer reasoners."

Marjory sat down next to Adela.

"Women do waste a lot of time on dress, don't they?" she asked, in a
meditative tone; "and a lot of thought, too!"

"Hallo!" exclaimed Lord Semingham.

"I mean, thought they might give to really important things. You can't
imagine George Eliot----"

"What about Queen Elizabeth?" interrupted Semingham.

"She was a horrible woman," said Adela.

"Phryne attached no importance to it," added Semingham.

"Oh, I forgot! Tell me about her," cried Marjory.

"A strong-minded woman, Miss Marjory."

"He's talking nonsense, Marjory."

"I supplied a historical instance in Miss Valentine's favour."

"I shall look her up," said Marjory, at which Lord Semingham smiled in
quiet amusement. He was a man who saw his joke a long way off, and could
wait patiently for it.

"Yes, do," he said, lighting a cigarette.

Adela had grown grave, and was watching the girl's face. It was a pretty
face, and not a silly one; and Marjory's blue eyes gazed out to sea, as
though she were looking at something a great way off. Adela, with a
frown of impatience, turned to her other neighbour. She would not be
troubled with aspirations there. In fact, she was still annoyed with her
young friend on Evan Haselden's account. But it was no use turning to
Lord Semingham. His eyes were more than half-closed, and he was beating
time gently to the Casino band, audible in the distance. Adela sighed.
At last Marjory broke the silence.

"When Mr. Ruston comes," she began, "I shall ask him whether----"

The sentence was not finished.

"When who comes?" cried Adela; and Semingham opened his eyes and stilled
his foot-pats.

"Mr. Ruston."

"Is he coming after all? I thought, now that Dennison----"

"Oh, yes--he's coming with Walter. Didn't you know?"

"Is he coming to-day?"

"I suppose so. Aren't you glad?"

"Of course," from Adela, and "Oh, uncommonly," from Lord Semingham,
seemed at first sight answers satisfactory enough; but Marjory's
inquiring gaze rested on their faces.

"Come for a stroll," said Adela abruptly, and passing her arm through
Marjory's, she made her rise. Semingham, having gasped out his
conventional reply, sat like a man of stone, but Adela, for all that it
was needless, whispered imperatively, "Stay where you are."

"Well, Marjory," she went on, as they began to walk, "I don't know that
I am glad after all."

"I believe you don't like him."

"I believe I don't," said Adela slowly. It was a point she had not yet
quite decided.

"I didn't use to."

"But you do now?"

"Yes."

Adela hated the pregnant brevity of this affirmative.

"Mamma doesn't," laughed Marjory. "She's so angry with him carrying off
Walter. As if it wasn't a grand thing for Walter! So she's quite turned
round about him."

"He's not staying in--with you, I suppose?"

"Oh, no. Though I don't see why he shouldn't. Conventions are so stupid,
aren't they? Mrs. Dennison's there," and Marjory looked up with an
appeal to calm reason as personified in Adela.

At another time, nineteen's view of twenty-nine--Marjory's conception of
Maggie Dennison as a sufficing chaperon--would have amused Adela. But
she was past amusement. Her patience snapped, as it were, in two. She
turned almost fiercely on her companion, forgetting all prudence in her
irritation.

"For heaven's sake, child, what do you mean? Do you think he's coming to
see you?"

Marjory drew her arm out from Adela's, and retreated a step from her.

"Adela! I never thought----" She did not end, conscious, perhaps, that
her flushed face gave her words the lie. Adela swept on.

"You! He's not coming to see you. I don't believe he's coming to see
anyone--no, not even Maggie--I mean no one, at all."

The girl's look marked the fatal slip.

"Oh!" she gasped, just audibly.

"I don't believe he cares _that_ for any of us--for anyone alive.
Marjory, I didn't mean what I said about Maggie, I didn't indeed. Don't
look like that. Oh, what a stupid girl you are!" and she ended with a
half-hysterical laugh.

For some moments they stood facing one another, saying nothing. The
meaning of Adela's words was sinking into Marjory's mind.

"Let's walk on. People will wonder," said she at last; and she enlaced
Adela's arm again. After another long pause, during which her face
expressed the turmoil of her thoughts, she whispered,

"Adela, is that why Mr. Loring went away?"

"I don't know why he went away."

"You think me a child, so you say you don't mean it now. You do mean it,
you know. You wouldn't say a thing like that for nothing. Tell me what
you do mean, Adela." It was almost an order. Adela suddenly realised
that she had struck down to a force and a character. "Tell me exactly
what you mean," insisted Marjory; "you ought to tell me, Adela."

Adela found herself obeying.

"I don't know about him; but I'm afraid of her," she stammered, as if
confessing a shameful deed of her own. A moment later she broke into
entreaty. "Go away, dear. Don't get mixed up in it. Don't have anything
to do with him."

"Do you go away when your friends are in trouble or in danger?"

Adela felt suddenly small--then wise--then small because her wisdom was
of a small kind. Yet she gave it utterance.

"But, Marjory, think of--think of yourself. If you----."

"I know what you're going to say. If I care for him? I don't. I hardly
know him. But, if I did, I might--I might be of some use. And are you
going to leave her all alone? I thought you were her friend. Are you
just going to look on? Though you think--what you think!"

Adela caught hold of the girl's hands. There was a choking in her
throat, and she could say nothing.

"But if he sees?" she murmured, when she found speech.

"He won't see. There's nothing to see. I shan't show it. Adela, I shall
stay. Why do you think what--what you think?"

People might wonder, if they would--perhaps they did--when Adela drew
Marjory towards her, and kissed her lips.

"I couldn't, my dear," she said, "but, if you can, for heaven's sake do.
I may be wrong, but--I'm uneasy."

Marjory's lips quivered, but she held her head proudly up; then she
sobbed a short quick-stifled sob, and then smiled.

"I daresay it's not a bit true," she said.

Adela pressed her hand again, saying,

"I'm an emotional old creature."

"Why did Mr. Loring go away?" demanded Marjory.

"I don't know. He thought it----"

"Best? Well, he was wrong."

Adela could not hear Tom attacked.

"Maggie turned him out," she said--which account of the matter was,
perhaps, just a little one-sided, though containing a part of the truth.
Marjory meditated on it for a moment, Adela still covertly looking at
her. The discovery was very strange. Half-an-hour ago she had smiled
because the girl hinted a longing after something beyond frocks, and had
laughed at her simple acceptance of Semingham's joke. Now she found
herself turning to her, looking to her for help in the trouble that had
puzzled her. In her admiration of the girl's courage, she forgot to
wonder at her intuition, her grasp of evil possibilities, the knowledge
of Maggie Dennison that her resolve implied. Adda watched her, as, their
farewell said, she walked, first quickly, then very slowly, towards the
villa which Mrs. Dennison had hired, on the cliff-side, near the old
Castle. Then, with a last sigh, she put up her parasol and sauntered
back to the Hôtel de Rome. Costume number two would be on by now, and
Bessie Semingham ready for luncheon.

Marjory, finally sunk into the slow gait that means either idleness or
deep thought, made her way up to the villa. With every step she drew
nearer, the burden she had taken up seemed heavier. It was not sorrow
for the dawning dream that the storm-cloud had eclipsed that she really
thought of. But the task loomed large in its true difficulty, as her
first enthusiasm spent itself. If Adela were right, what could she do?
If Adela were wrong, what unpardonable offence she might give. Ah, was
Adela right? Strange and new as the idea was, there was an unquestioning
conviction in her manner that Marjory could hardly resist. Save under
the stress of a conviction, speech on such a matter would have been an
impossible crime. And Marjory remembered, with a sinking heart, Maggie
Dennison's smile of happy triumph when she read out the lines in which
Ruston told of his coming. Yes, it was, or it might be, true. But where
lay her power to help?

Coming round the elbow of the rising path, she caught sight of Maggie
Dennison sitting in the garden. Mrs. Dennison wore white; her pale,
clear-cut profile was towards Marjory; she rested her chin on her hand,
and her elbow on her knee, and she was looking on the ground. Softly
Marjory drew near. An unopened letter from Harry lay on a little table;
the children had begun their mid-day meal in the room, whose open window
was but a few feet behind; Mrs. Dennison's thoughts were far away.
Marjory stopped short. A stronger buffet of fear, a more overwhelming
sense of helplessness, smote her. She understood better why Adela had
been driven to do nothing--to look on. She smiled for an instant; the
idea put itself so whimsically; but she thought that, had Mrs. Dennison
been walking over a precipice, it would need all one's courage to
interfere with her. She would think it such an impertinence. And Ruston?
Marjory saw, all in a minute, his cheerful scorn, his unshaken
determination, his rapid dismissal of one more obstacle. She drew in her
breath in a long inspiration, and Mrs. Dennison raised her eyes and
smiled.

"I believe I felt you there," she said, smiling. "At least, I began to
think of you."

Marjory sat near her hostess.

"Did you meet anyone?" asked Mrs. Dennison.

"Adela Ferrars and Lord Semingham."

"Well, had they anything to say?"

"No--I don't think so," she answered slowly.

"What should they have to say in this place? The children have begun.
Aren't you hungry?"

"Not very."

"Well, I am," and Mrs. Dennison arose. "I forgot it, but I am."

"They didn't know Mr. Ruston was coming."

"Didn't they?" smiled Mrs. Dennison. "And has Adela forgiven you? Oh,
you know, the poor boy is a friend of hers, as he is of mine."

"We didn't talk about it."

"And you don't want to? Very well, we won't. See, here's a long
letter--it's very heavy, at least--from Harry. I must read it
afterwards."

"Perhaps it's to say he can come sooner."

"I expect not," said Mrs. Dennison, and she opened the letter. "No; a
fortnight hence at the soonest," she announced, after reading a few
lines.

Marjory was both looking and listening closely, but she detected neither
disappointment nor relief.

"He's seen Tom Loring! Oh, and Tom sends me his best remembrances. Poor
Tom! Marjory, does Adela talk about Mr. Loring?"

"She mentioned him once."

"She thinks it was all my fault," laughed Mrs. Dennison. "A woman always
thinks it's a woman's fault; at least, that's our natural tendency,
though we're being taught to overcome it. Marjory, you look dull! It
will be livelier for you when your brother and Mr. Ruston come."

The hardest thing about great resolves and lofty moods is their
intermixture with everyday life. The intervals, the "waits," the mass of
irrelevant trivialities that life inartistically mingles with its drama,
flinging down pell-mell a heap of great and small--these cool courage
and make discernment distrust itself. Mrs. Dennison seemed so quiet, so
placid, so completely the affectionate but not anxious wife, the kind
hostess, and even the human gossip, that Marjory wanted to rub her eyes,
wondering if all her heroics were nonsense--a girl's romance gone wrong.
There was nothing to be done but eat and drink, and talk and lounge in
the sun--there was no hint of a drama, no call for a rescue, no place
for a sacrifice. And Marjory had been all aglow to begin. Her face grew
dull and her eyelids half-dropped as she leant her head on the back of
her chair.

"_Déjeuner!_" cried Mrs. Dennison merrily. "And this afternoon we're all
going to gamble at _petits chevaux_, and if we win we're going to buy
more Omofagas. There's a picture of a speculator's family!"

"Mr. Dennison's not a speculator, is he?"

"Oh, it depends on what you mean. Anyhow, I am;" and Mrs. Dennison,
waving her letter in the air and singing softly, almost danced in her
merry walk to the house. Then, crying her last words, "Be quick!" from
the door, she disappeared.

A moment later she was laughing and chattering to her children. Marjory
heard her burlesque complaints over the utter disappearance of an
omelette she had set her heart upon.

That afternoon they all played at _petits chevaux_, and the only one to
win was Madge. But Madge utterly refused to invest her gains in
Omofagas. She assigned no reasons, slating that her mother did not like
her to declare the feeling which influenced her, and Mrs. Dennison
laughed again. But Adela Ferrars would not look towards Marjory, but
kept her eyes on an old gentleman who had been playing also, and playing
with good fortune. He had looked round curiously when, in the course of
the chaff, they had mentioned Omofaga, and Adela detected in him the
wish to look again. She wondered who he was, scrutinising his faded blue
eyes and the wrinkles of weariness on his brow. Willie Ruston could have
told her. It was Baron von Geltschmidt of Frankfort.




                              CHAPTER XII.

                              IT CAN WAIT.


In all things evil and good, to the world, and--a thing quite rare--to
himself, Willie Ruston was an unaffected man. Success, the evidence of
power and the earnest of more power, gave him his greatest pleasure, and
he received it with his greatest and most open satisfaction. It did not
surprise him, but it elated him, and his habit was to conceal neither
the presence of elation nor the absence of surprise. That irony in the
old sense, which means the well-bred though hardly sincere depreciation
of a man's own qualities and achievements, was not his. When he had done
anything, he liked to dine with his friends and talk it over. He had
been sharing the Carlins' unfashionable six o'clock meal at Hampstead
this evening, and had taken the train to Baker Street, and was now
sauntering home with a cigar. He had talked the whole thing over with
them. Carlin had said that no one could have managed the affair so well
as he had, and Mrs. Carlin had not once referred to that lost _tabula in
naufragio_, the coal business. Yes, his attack on London had been a
success. He had known nothing of London, save that its denizens were
human beings, and that knowledge, whether in business or society, had
been enough. His great scheme was floated; a few months more would see
him in Omofaga; there was money to last for a long time to come; and he
had been cordially received and even made a lion of in the
drawing-rooms. They would look for his name in the papers ("and find it,
by Jove," he interpolated). Men in high places would think of him when
there was a job to be "put through;" and women, famous in regions
inaccessible to the vulgar, would recollect their talks with Mr. Ruston.
Decidedly they were human beings, and therefore, raw as he was (he just
knew that he had come to them a little raw), he had succeeded.

Yet they were, some of them, strange folk. There were complications in
them which he found it necessary to reconnoitre. They said a great many
things which they did not think, and, _en revanche_, would often only
hint what they did. And----But here he yawned, and, finding his cigar
out, relit it. He was not in the mood for analysing his acquaintance. He
let his fancy play more lightly. It was evening, and work was done. He
liked London evenings. He had liked bandying repartees with Adela
Ferrars (though she had been too much for him if she could have kept her
temper); he liked talking to Marjory Valentine and seeing her occupied
with his ideas. Most of all, he liked trying to catch Maggie Dennison's
thought as it flashed out for a moment, and fled to shelter again. He
had laughed again and again over the talk that Tom Loring had
interrupted--and not less because of the interruption. There was little
malice in him, and he bore no grudge against Tom. Even his anger at the
Omofaga articles had been chiefly for public purposes and public
consumption. It was always somebody's "game" to spoil his game, and one
must not quarrel with men for playing their own hands. Tom amused him,
and had amused him, especially by his behaviour over that talk. No doubt
the position had looked a strange one. Tom had been so shocked. Poor
Tom, it must be very serious to be so easily shocked. Mr. Ruston was not
easily shocked.

Unaffected, free from self-consciousness, undividedly bent on his
schemes, unheeding of everything but their accomplishment, he had spent
little time in considering the considerable stir which he had, in fact,
created in the circle of his more intimate associates. They had proved
pliable and pleasant, and these were the qualities he liked in his
neighbours. They said agreeable things to him, and they did what he
wanted. He had stayed not (save once, and half in jest, with Maggie
Dennison) to inquire why, and the quasi-real, quasi-burlesque
apprehension of him--burlesqued perhaps lest it should seem too
real--which had grown up among such close observers as Adela Ferrars and
Semingham, would have struck him as absurd, the outcome of that idle
business of brain which weaves webs of fine fancies round the obvious,
and loses the power of action in the fascination of self-created
puzzles. The _nuances_ of a woman's attraction towards a man, whether it
be admiration, or interest, or pass beyond--whether it be liking and
just not love--or interest running into love--or love masquerading as
interest, or what-not, Willie Ruston recked little of. He was a man, and
a young man. He liked women and clever women--yes, and handsome women.
But to spend your time thinking of or about women, or, worse still, of
or about what women thought of you, seemed poor economy of precious
days--amusing to do, maybe, in spare hours, inevitable now and
again--but to be driven or laughed away when there was work to be done.

Such was the colour of his floating thoughts, and the loose-hung
meditation brought him to his own dwelling, in a great building which
overlooked Hyde Park. He lived high up in a small, irregular,
many-cornered room, sparely-furnished, dull and pictureless. The only
thing hanging on the walls was a large scale map of Omofaga and the
neighbouring territories; in lieu of nicnacks there stood on the
mantlepiece lumps of ore, specimens from the mines of Omofaga (would not
these convince the most obstinate unbeliever?), and half-smothered by
ill-dusted papers, a small photograph of Ruston and a potent Omofagan
chief seated on the ground with a large piece of paper before them--a
treaty no doubt. A well-worn sofa, second-hand and soft, and a deep
arm-chair redeemed the place from utter comfortlessness, but it was
plain that beauty in his daily surroundings was not essential to Willie
Ruston. He did not notice furniture.

He walked in briskly, but stopped short with his hand still on the knob
of the door. Harry Dennison lay on the sofa, with his arm flung across
his face. He sprang up on Ruston's entrance.

"Hullo! Been here long? I've been dining with Carlin," said Ruston, and,
going to a cupboard, he brought out whisky and soda water.

Harry Dennison began to explain his presence. In the first place he had
nothing to do; in the second he wanted someone to talk to; in the
third--at last he blurted it out--the first, second, third and only
reason for his presence.

"I don't believe I can manage alone in town," he said.

"Not manage? There's nothing to do. And Carlin's here."

"You see I've got other work besides Omofaga," pleaded Harry.

"Oh, I know Dennisons have lots of irons in the fire. But Omofaga won't
trouble you. I've told Carlin to wire me if any news comes, and I can be
back in a few hours."

Harry had come to suggest that the expedition to Dieppe should be
abandoned for a week or two. He got no chance and sat silent.

"It's all done," continued Ruston. "The stores are all on their way.
Jackson is waiting for them on the coast. Why, the train will start
inland in a couple of months from now. They'll go very slow though. I
shall catch them up all right."

Harry brightened a little.

"Belford said it was uncertain when you would start," he said.

"It may be uncertain to Belford, it's not to me," observed Mr. Ruston,
lighting his pipe.

The speech sounded unkind; but Mr. Belford's mind dwelt in uncertainty
contentedly.

"Then you think of----?"

"My dear Dennison, I don't 'think' at all. To-day's the 12th of August.
Happen what may, I sail on the 10th of November. Nothing will keep me
after that--nothing."

"Belford started for the Engadine to-day."

"Well, he won't worry you then. Let it alone, my dear fellow. It's all
right."

Clearly Mr. Ruston meant to go to Dieppe. That was now to Harry Dennison
bad news; but he meant to go to Omofaga also, and to go soon; that was
good. Harry, however, had still something that he wished to convey--a
bit of diplomacy to carry out.

"I hope you'll find Maggie better," he began. "She was rather knocked up
when she went."

"A few days will have put her all right," responded Ruston cheerfully.

He was never ill and treated fatigue with a cheery incredulousness. But,
at least, he spoke with an utter absence of undue anxiety on the score
of another man's wife.

Harry Dennison, primed by Mrs. Cormack's suggestions, went on,

"I wish you'd talk to her as little as you can about Omofaga. She's very
interested in it, you know, and--and very excitable--and all that. We
want her mind to get a complete rest."

"Hum. I expect, then, I mustn't talk to her at all."

The manifest impossibility of making such a request did not prevent
Harry yearning after it.

"I don't ask that," he said, smiling weakly.

"It won't hurt her," said Willie Ruston. "And she likes it."

She liked it beyond question.

"It tires her," Harry persisted. "It--it gets on her nerves. It absorbs
her too much."

His face was turned up to Ruston. As he spoke the last words, Ruston
directed his eyes, suddenly and rapidly, upon him. Harry could not
escape the encounter of eyes; hastily he averted his head, and his face
flushed. Ruston continued to look at him, a slight smile on his lips.

"Absorbs her?" he repeated slowly, fingering his beard.

"Well, you know what I mean."

Another long stare showed Ruston's meditative preoccupation. Harry sat
uncomfortable under it, wishing he had not let fall the word.

"Well, I'll be careful," said Ruston at last. "Anything else?"

Harry rose. Ruston carried an atmosphere of business about with him, and
the visit seemed naturally to end with the business of it. Taking his
hat, Harry moved towards the door. Then, pausing, he smiled in an
embarrassed way, and remarked,

"You can talk to Marjory Valentine, you know."

"So I can. She's a nice girl."

Harry twirled his hat in his fingers. His brain had conceived more
diplomacy.

"It'll be a fine chance for you to win her heart," he suggested with a
tentative laugh.

"I might do worse," said Willie Ruston.

"You might--much worse," said Harry eagerly.

"Aren't you rather giving away your friend young Haselden?"

"Who told you, Ruston?"

"Lady Val. Who told you?"

"Semingham."

"Ah! Well, what would Haselden say to your idea?"

"Well, she won't have him--he's got no chance anyhow."

"All right. I'll think about it. Good-night."

He watched his guest depart, but did not accompany him on his way, and,
left alone, sat down in the deep arm-chair. His smile was still on his
lips. Poor Harry Dennison was a transparent schemer--one of those whose
clumsy efforts to avert what they fear effects naught save to suggest
the doing of it. Yet Willie Ruston's smile had more pity than scorn in
it. True, it had more of amusement than of either. He could have taken a
slate and written down all Harry's thoughts during the interview. But
whence had come the change? Why had Dennison himself bidden him to
Dieppe, to come now, a fortnight later, and beg him not to go? Why did
he now desire his wife to hear no more of Omofaga, whose chief delight
in it had been that it caught her fancy and imparted to him some of the
interest she found in it? Ruston saw in the transformation the working
of another mind.

"Somebody's been putting it into his head," he muttered, still
half-amused, but now half-angry also.

And, with his usual rapidity of judgment, he darted unhesitatingly to a
conclusion. He identified the hand in the business; he recognised whose
more subtle thoughts Harry Dennison had stumbled over and mauled in his
painful devices. But to none is it given to be infallible, and want of
doubt does not always mean absence of error. Forgetting this commonplace
truth, Willie Ruston slapped his thigh, leapt up from his chair and,
standing on the rug, exclaimed,

"Loring--by Jove!"

It was clear to him. Loring was his enemy; he had displaced Loring.
Loring hated him and Omofaga. Loring had stirred a husband's jealousy to
further his own grudge. The same temper of mind that made his anger fade
away when he had arrived at this certainty, prevented any surprise at
the discovery. It was natural in man to seek revenge, to use the nearest
weapon, to counter stroke with stroke, not to throw away any advantages
for the sake of foibles of generosity. So, then, it was Loring who bade
him not go to Dieppe, who prayed him to not to "absorb" Mrs. Dennison in
Omofaga, who was ready, notwithstanding his hatred and distrust, to see
him the lover of Marjory Valentine sooner than the too engrossing friend
of Mrs. Dennison! What a fool they must think him!--and, with this
reflection, he put the whole matter out of his head. It could wait till
he was at Dieppe, and, taking hold of the great map by the roller at the
bottom, he drew it to him. Then he reached and lifted the lamp from the
table, and set it high on the mantlepiece. Its light shone now on his
path, and with his finger he traced the red line that ran, curving and
winding, inwards from the coast, till it touched the blue letters of the
"Omofaga" that sprawled across the map. The line ended in a cross of red
paint. The cross was Fort Imperial--was to be Fort Imperial, at least;
but Willie Ruston's mind overleapt all difference of tenses. He stood
and looked, pulling hard and fast at his pipe. He was there--there in
Fort Imperial already--far away from London and London folk--from weak
husbands and their causes of anxiety--from the pleasing recreations of
fascinating society, from the covert attacks of men whose noses he had
put out of joint. He forgot them all; their feelings became naught to
him. What mattered their graces, their assaults, their weal or woe? He
was in Omofaga, carving out of its rock a stable seat, carving on the
rock face, above the seat, a name that should live.

At last he turned away, flinging his empty pipe on the table and
dropping the map from his hand.

"I shall go to bed," he said. "Three months more of it!"

And to bed he went, never having thought once during the whole evening
of a French lady, who liked to get amusement out of her neighbours, and
had stayed in town on purpose to have some more talks with Harry
Dennison. Had Willie Ruston not been quite so sure that he read Tom
Loring's character aright, he might have spared a thought for Mrs.
Cormack.




                             CHAPTER XIII.

                       A SPASM OF PENITENCE.


Tom Loring had arranged to spend the whole of the autumn in London. His
Omofaga articles had gained such favourable notice that his editor had
engaged him to contribute a series dealing with African questions and
African companies (and the latter are in the habit of producing the
former), while he was occupied, on his own account, at the British
Museum, in making way with a treatise of a politico-philosophical
description, which had been in his head for several years. He hailed
with pleasure the prospect of getting on with it; the leisure afforded
him by his departure from the Dennisons was, in its way, a consolation
for the wrench involved in the parting. Could he have felt more at ease
about the course of events in his absence, he would have endured his
sojourn in town with equanimity.

Of course, the place was fast becoming a desert, but, at this moment,
chance, which always objects to our taking things for granted, brought a
carriage exactly opposite the bench on which Tom was seated, and he
heard his name called in a high-pitched voice that he recognised.
Looking up, he saw Mrs. Cormack leaning over the side of her victoria,
smiling effusively and beckoning to him. That everyone should go save
Mrs. Cormack seemed to Tom the irony of circumstance. With a mutter to
himself, he rose and walked up to the carriage. He then perceived, to
his surprise, that it contained, hidden behind Mrs. Cormack's
sleeves--sleeves were large that year--another inmate. It was Evan
Haselden, and he greeted Tom with an off-hand nod.

"The good God," cried Mrs. Cormack, "evidently kept me here to console
young men! Are you left desolate like Mr. Haselden here?"

"Well, it's not very lively," responded Tom, as amiably as he could.

"No, it isn't," she agreed, with the slightest, quickest glance at Evan,
who was staring moodily at the tops of the trees.

Tom laughed. The woman amused him in spite of himself. And her failures
to extract entertainment from poor heart-broken Evan struck him as
humorous.

"But I'm at work," he went on, "so I don't mind."

"Ah! Are you still crushing----?"

"No," interrupted Tom quickly. "That's done."

"I should not have guessed it," said Mrs. Cormack, opening her eyes.

"I mean, I've finished the articles on that point."

"That is rather a different thing," laughed she.

"I'm afraid so," said Tom.

"I wish to heaven it wasn't!" ejaculated Evan suddenly, without shifting
his gaze from the treetops.

"Oh, he is very very bad," whispered Mrs. Cormack. "Poor young man! Are
you bad too?"

"Eh?"

"Oh, but I know."

"Oh, no, you don't," said Tom.

Suddenly Evan rose, opened the carriage door, got out, shut it, and
lifted his hat.

"Good-bye," said Mrs. Cormack, smiling merrily.

"Good-bye. Thanks," said Evan, with unchanged melancholy, and, with
another nod to Tom, he walked round to the path and strode quickly away.

"How absurd!" said she.

"Not at all. I like to see him honest about it. He's hard hit--and he's
not ashamed of it."

"Oh, well," said Mrs. Cormack, shrugging the subject away in weariness
of it. "And how do you stand banishment? Will you get in?"

"Yes, if you won't assume----"

"Too great familiarity, Mr. Loring?"

"Oh, I was only going to say--with my affairs. With me--I should be
charmed," and Tom settled himself in the victoria.

He had, now he came to think of it, been really very much bored; and the
little woman was quite a resource.

She rewarded his ironical gallantry with a look that told him she took
it for what it was worth, but liked it all the same; and, after a pause,
asked,

"And you see Mr. Dennison often?"

"Very seldom, on the contrary. I don't know what he does with himself."

"The poor man! He walks up and down. I hear him walking up and down."

"What does he do that for?"

"Ah! what? Well, he cannot be happy, can he?"

"Can't he?" said Tom, determined to understand nothing.

"You are very discreet," she said, with a malicious smile.

"I'm obliged to be. Somebody must be."

"Mr. Loring," she said abruptly, "you don't like me, neither you nor
Miss Ferrars."

"I never answer for others. For myself----"

"Oh, I know. What does it matter? Well, anyhow, I'm sorry for that poor
man."

"Your sympathy is very ready, Mrs. Cormack."

"You mean it is too soon--premature?"

"I mean it's altogether unnecessary, to my humble thinking."

"But I'm not a fool," she protested.

Tom could not help laughing. The laugh, however, rather spoilt his
argument.

"Have it your own way," he conceded, conscious of his error, and trying
to cover it by a burlesque surrender. "He's miserable."

"Well, he is."

There was a placid certainty about her that disturbed Tom's attitude of
incredulity.

"Why is he?" he asked curiously.

"I have talked to him. I know," she answered, with a nod full of
meaning.

"Oh, have you?"

"Yes, and he--well, do you want to hear, or will you be angry and
despise me as you used?"

"I want to hear."

"What did I use to say? That the man would come? Well, he has come.
_Voilà tout!_"

"Oh, so you say. But Harry doesn't think such--I beg pardon, I was about
to say, nonsense."

"Yes, he does. At least, he is afraid of it."

"How do you know?"

"I tell you, we have talked. And I saw. He almost cried that he couldn't
go to Dieppe, and that somebody else----"

Tom suddenly turned upon her.

"Who began the talk?" he demanded.

"What do you say?"

"Who began?"

"Oh, what nonsense! Who does begin to talk? How do I know? It came, Mr.
Loring."

Tom said nothing.

"You look as if you didn't believe me," she remarked, pouting.

"I don't. He's the most unsuspicious fellow alive."

"Well, if you like, I began. I'm not ashamed. But I said very little.
When he asked me if I thought it good that she and--the other--should be
together out there and he here--well, was I to say yes?"

"I think," observed Tom, in quiet and deliberate tones, "that it's a
great pity that some women can't be gagged."

"They can, but only with kisses," said Mrs. Cormack, not at all
offended. "Oh, don't be frightened. I do not wish to be gagged at all.
If I did--there is more than one man in the world."

Tom despised and half-hated her; but he liked her good-nature, and, in
his heart, admired her for not flinching. Her shamelessness was crossed
with courage.

"So you've made him miserable?"

"Well, I might say, I, a wicked Frenchwoman, that it is better to be
deceived than to be wretched. But you, an Englishman----! Oh, never, Mr.
Loring!"

Tom sat silent a little while.

"I don't know what to do," he said, half in reverie.

"Who thought you would?" asked Mrs. Cormack, unkindly.

"I believe it's all a mare's nest."

"That means a mistake, a delusion?"

"It does."

"Then I don't think you do believe it. And, if you do, you are wrong. It
is not all a--a mare's nest."

She pronounced the word with unfamiliar delicateness.

Tom knew that he did not believe that it was all a mare's nest. He would
have given everything in the world--save one thing--and that, he
thought, he had not got--to believe it.

"Then, if you believed it, why didn't you do something?" he asked rather
fiercely.

"What have you all done? I, at least, warned him. Yes, since you insist,
I hinted it. But you--you ran away; and your Adela Ferrars, she looks
prim and pained, oh! and shocked, and doesn't come so much."

It was a queer source to learn lessons from, and Tom was no less
surprised than Adela had been a day or two before at Dieppe.

"What should you do?" he asked, in new-born humility.

"I? Nothing. What is it to me?"

"What should you do, if you were me?"

"Make love to her myself," smiled Mrs. Cormack. She was having her
revenge on Tom for many a scornful speech.

"If you'd held your tongue, it would all have blown over!" he exclaimed
in exasperation.

"It will blow over still; but it will blow first," she said. "If that
contents you, hold your tongue."

Then she turned to Tom, and laid a small fore-finger on his arm.

"Mark this," said she, "he does not care for her. He cares for himself;
she is--what would you say? an incident--an accident--I do not know how
to say it--to him."

"Well, if you're right there----" began Tom in some relief.

"If I'm right there, it will make no difference--at first. But, as you
say, it will blow over--and sooner."

Tom looked at her, and thought, and looked again.

"By Jove, you're not a fool, Mrs. Cormack," said he, almost under his
breath.

Then he added, louder,

"It's the wisdom of the devil."

"Oh, you surpass yourself," she smiled. "Your compliments are
magnificent."

"You must have learnt it from him."

"Oh, no. From my husband," said Mrs. Cormack.

The carriage, which during their talk had moved slowly round the circle,
stopped again.

Mrs. Cormack turned to Tom. He was already looking at her.

"I don't understand you," said he.

"No? Well, you'll hardly believe it, but that does not surprise me."

"I'm not sure you don't mean well, if you weren't ashamed to confess
it," said Tom.

For the first time since he had known her, she blushed and looked
embarrassed. Then she began, in a quick tone,

"Well, I talked. I wanted to see how he took it; and it amused me.
And--well, our dear Maggie--she is so very magnificent at times. She
looks down so calmly--oh! from such a height--on one. She had told me
that day--well, never mind that; it was true, I daresay. I don't love
truth. I don't see what right people have to say things to me, just
because one may know they are true."

"So you made a little mischief?"

"Well, I hear that poor man walking up and down. I want to comfort him.
I asked him to come in, and he refused. Then I offered to go in--he was
very frightened. Oh, _mon Dieu_!" and she laughed almost hysterically.

This very indirect confession proved in the end to be all that Mrs.
Cormack's penitence could drive her to, and Tom left her, feeling a
little softened towards her, but hardly better equipped for action.
What, indeed, could be done? Tom's sense of futility expressed itself in
a long letter to Adela Ferrars. As he had no suggestions for present
action, he took refuge in future promises.

"It will be very awkward for me to come, but if, as time goes on, you
think I should be any good, I will come."

And Adela, when she read it, was tempted to send for him on the spot; he
would have been of no use, but he would have comforted her. But then his
presence would unquestionably exasperate Maggie Dennison. Adela decided
to wait.

Now, by the time Tom Loring's letter reached Dieppe, young Sir Walter
and Willie Ruston were on the boat, and they arrived hard on its heels.
They took up their abode at a hotel a few doors from where the
Seminghams were staying, and Walter at once went round to pay his
respects.

Ruston stayed in to write letters. So he said; but when he was alone he
stood smoking at the window and looking at the people down below.
Presently, to his surprise, he saw the same old gentleman whom Adela had
noticed in the Casino.

"The Baron, by Jove!" he exclaimed. "Now, what brings him here?"

The Baron was sauntering slowly by, wrapped in a cloak, and leaning
heavily on a malacca cane. In a moment Willie Ruston was down the stairs
and after him.

Hearing his name cried, the Baron stopped and turned round.

"What chance brings you here?" asked Willie, holding out his hand.

"Oh, hardly chance," said the Baron. "I always go to some seaside place,
and I thought I might meet friends here," and he smiled significantly.

"Yes," said Ruston, after a pause; "I believe I did mention it in
Threadneedle Street. I went in there the other day."

By the general term Threadneedle Street he meant to indicate the offices
of the Baron's London correspondents, which were situate there.

"They keep you informed, it seems?"

"I live by being kept informed," said the Baron.

Ruston was walking by him, accommodating his pace to the old man's
feeble walk.

"You mean you came to see me?" he asked.

"Well, if you'll forgive the liberty--in part."

"And why did you want me?"

"Oh, I've not lost all interest in Omofaga."

"No, you haven't," said Ruston. "On the contrary, you've been increasing
your interest."

The Baron stopped and looked at him.

"Oh, you know that?"

"Certainly."

The Baron laughed.

"Then you can tell me whether I shall lose my money," he said.

"Do you ever lose your money, Baron?"

"But am I to hear about Omofaga?" asked the Baron, countering question
by question.

"As much as you like," answered Ruston, with the indifference of perfect
candour.

"Ah, by the way, I have heard about it already. Who are the ladies here
who talk about it?"

Willie Ruston gave a careful catalogue of all the persons in Dieppe who
were interested in the Omofaga Company. The Baron identified the
Seminghams and Adela. Then he observed,

"And the other lady is Mrs. Dennison, is she?"

"She is. I'm going to her house to-morrow. Shall I take you?"

"I should be charmed."

"Very well. To-morrow afternoon."

"And you'll dine with me to-night?"

Ruston was about to refuse; but the Baron added, half seriously,

"I've come a long way to see you."

"All right, I'll come," he said. Then he paused a moment, and looked at
the Baron curiously. "And perhaps you'll tell me then," he added.

"Why I've come?"

"Yes; and why you've been buying. You were bought out. What do you want
to come in again for?"

"I'll tell you all that now," said the Baron. "I've come because I
thought I should like to see some more of you; and I've been buying
because I fancy you'll make a success of it."

Willie Ruston pulled his beard thoughtfully.

"Don't you believe me?" asked the Baron.

"Let's wait a bit," suggested Ruston. Then, with a sudden twinkle of his
eye, his holiday mood seemed to come back again. Seizing the Baron's
arm, he pressed it, and said with a laugh, "I say, Baron, if you want to
get control over Omofaga----"

"But, my dear friend----" protested the Baron.

"If you do--I only say 'if'--I'm not the only man you've got to fight.
Well, yes, I am the only _man_."

"My dear young friend, I don't understand you," pleaded the Baron.

"We'll go and see Mrs. Dennison to-morrow," said Willie Ruston.




                              CHAPTER XIV.

                         THE THING OR THE MAN.


"Well?"

It was the morning of the next day, Mrs. Dennison sat in her place in
the little garden on the cliff, and Willie Ruston stood just at the turn
of the mounting path, where Marjory had paused to look at her friend.

"Well, here I am," said he.

She did not move, but held out her hand. He advanced and took it.

"I met your children down below," he went on, "but they would hardly
speak to me. Why don't they like me?"

"Never mind the children."

"But I do mind. Most children like me."

"How is everything?"

"In London? Oh, first-rate. I saw your husband the----"

"I mean, how is Omofaga?"

"Capital; and here?"

"It has been atrociously dull. What could you expect?"

"Well, I didn't expect that, or I shouldn't have come."

"Are the stores started?"

"I thought it was holiday time? Well, yes, they are."

She had been looking at him ever since he came, and at last he noticed
it.

"Do I look well?" he asked in joke.

"You know, it's rather a pleasure to look at you," she replied. "I've
been feeling so shut in," and she pushed her hair back from her
forehead, and glanced at him with a bright smile. "And it's really going
well?"

"So well," he nodded, "that everything's quiet, and the preparations
well ahead. In three months" (and his enthusiasm began to get hold of
him) "I shall be off; in two more I hope to be actually there, and
then--why, forward!"

She had listened at first with sparkling eyes; as he finished, her lips
drooped, and she leant back in her chair. There was a moment's silence;
then she said in a low voice,

"Three months!"

"It oughtn't to take more than two, if Jackson has arranged things
properly for me."

Evidently he was thinking of his march up country; but it was the first
three mouths that were in her mind. She had longed to see the thing
really started, hastened by all her efforts the hour that was to set him
at work, and dreamt of the day when he should set foot in Omofaga. Now
all this seemed assured, imminent, almost present; yet there was no
exultation in her tone.

"I meant, before you started," she said slowly.

He looked up in surprise.

"I can't manage sooner," he said, defending himself. "You know I don't
waste time."

He was still off the scent; and even she herself was only now, for the
first time and as yet dimly, realising her own mind.

"I have to do everything myself," he said. "Dear old Carlin can't walk a
step alone, and the Board"--he paused, remembering that Harry Dennison
was on the Board--"well, I find it hard to make them move as quick as I
want. I had to fix a date, and I fixed the earliest I could be
absolutely sure of."

"Why don't they help you more?" she burst out indignantly.

"Oh, I don't want help."

"Yes, but I helped you!" she exclaimed, leaning forward, full again of
animation.

"I can't deny it," he laughed. "You did indeed."

"Yes," she said, and became again silent.

"_Apropos_," said he. "I want to bring someone to see you this
afternoon--Baron von Geltschmidt."

"Who?"

"He was the German capitalist, you know."

"What! Why, what's he doing here?"

"He came to see me--so he says. May I bring him?"

"Why, yes. He's a great--a great man, isn't he?"

"Well, he's a great financier."

"And he came to see you?"

"So he says."

"And don't you believe him?"

"I don't know. I want your opinion," answered Ruston, with a smile.

"Are you serious?" she asked quickly. "I mean, do you really want my
opinion, or are you being polite?"

"I don't think _you_ a fool, you know," said Willie Ruston.

She flashed a glance of understanding, mingled with reproach, at him,
and, leaning forward again, said,

"Has he come about Omofaga?"

"That you might tell me too--or will you want all Omofaga if you do so
much?"

For a moment she smiled in recollection. Then her face grew sad.

"Much of Omofaga I shall have!" she said.

"Oh, I'll write," he promised carelessly.

"Write!" she repeated in low, scornful tones. "Would you like to be
written to about it? It'll happen to you, and I'm to be written to!"

"Well, then, I won't write."

"Yes, do write."

Willie Ruston smiled tolerantly, but his smile was suddenly cut short,
for Mrs. Dennison, not looking at him but out to sea, asked herself in a
whisper, which was plainly not meant for him though he heard it,

"How shall I bear it?"

He had been tilting his chair back; he brought the front legs suddenly
on to the ground again and asked,

"Bear what?"

She started to find he had heard, but attempted no evasion.

"When you've gone," she answered in simple directness.

He looked at her with raised eyebrows. There was no embarrassment in her
face, and no tremble in her voice; and no passion could he detect in
either.

"How flat it will all be," she added in a tone of utter weariness.

He was half-pleased, half-piqued at the way she seemed to look at him.
It not only failed to satisfy him, but stirred a new dissatisfaction. It
hinted much, but only, it seemed to him, to negative it. It left Omofaga
still all in all, and him of interest only because he would talk of and
work for Omofaga, and keep the Omofaga atmosphere about her. Now this
was wrong, for Omofaga existed for him, not he for Omofaga; that was the
faith of true disciples.

"You don't care about me," he said. "It's all the Company--and only the
Company because it gives you something to do. Well, the Company'll go on
(I hope), and you'll hear about our doings."

She turned to him with a puzzled look.

"I don't know what it is," she said with a shake of her head. Then, with
a sudden air of understanding, as though she had caught the meaning that
before eluded her, she cried, "I'm just like you, I believe. If I went
to Omofaga, and you had to stay----"

"Oh, it would be the deuce!" he laughed.

"Yes, yes. Well, it is--the deuce," she answered, laughing in return.
But in a moment she was grave again.

Her attraction for him--the old special attraction of the unknown and
unconquered--came strongly upon him, and mingled more now with pleasure
in her. Her silence let him think; and he began to think how wasted she
was on Harry Dennison. Another thought followed, and to that he gave
utterance.

"But you've lots of things you could do at home; you could have plenty
to work at, and plenty of--of influence, and so on."

"Yes, but--oh, it would come to Mr. Belford! Who wants to influence Mr.
Belford? Besides, I've grown to love it now, haven't you?"

"Omofaga?"

"Yes! It's so far off--and most people don't believe in it."

"No, confound them! I wish they did!"

"Do you? I'm not sure I do."

She was so absorbed that she had not heard an approaching step, and was
surprised to see Ruston jump up while her last sentence was but half
said.

"My dear Miss Valentine," he cried, his face lighting up with a smile of
pleasure, "how pleasant to meet you again!"

There was no mistaking the sincerity of his greeting. Marjory blushed as
she gave him her hand, and he fixed his eyes on her in undisguised
approval.

"You're looking splendid," he said. "Is it the air or the bathing or
what?"

Perhaps it was both in part, but, more than either, it was a change that
worked outwards from within, and was giving to her face the expression
without which mere beauty of form or colour is poor in allurement. The
last traces of what Lord Semingham meant by "insipidity" had been chased
away. Ruston felt the change though he could not track it.

Marjory, a bad dissembler, greeted him nervously, almost coldly; she was
afraid to let her gaze rest on him or on Mrs. Dennison for long, lest it
should hint her secret. Her manner betrayed such uneasiness that Ruston
noticed it. Mrs. Dennison did not, for something in Ruston's face had
caught her attention. She had seen many expressions in his eyes as he
looked at her--of sympathy, amusement, pleasure, even (what had pleased
her most) puzzle, but never what she saw now. The look now was a man's
homage to beauty--it differs from every other--a lover hardly seems to
have it unless his love be beautiful--and she had never yet seen it when
he looked at her. She turned away towards the sea, grasping the arm of
her chair with a sudden grip that streaked her fingers red and white.
Marjory also saw, and a wild hope leapt up in her that her task needed
not the doing. But a moment later Ruston was back in Omofaga--young Sir
Walter being his bridge for yet another transit.

"How's Mr. Dennison?" asked Marjory, when he gave her an opportunity.

"Oh, he's all right. You'd have heard, I suppose, if he hadn't been?"

It was true. Marjory recognised the inappropriateness of her question,
but Mrs. Dennison came to the rescue.

"Marjory wants a personal impression," she said. "You know she and my
husband are great allies!"

"Well," laughed Ruston, "he was a little cross with me because I would
come to Dieppe. I should have felt the same in his place; but he's well
enough, I think."

"I was going down to find Lady Semingham," said Marjory. "Are you coming
down this morning, Maggie?"

"Maggie" was something new--adopted at Mrs. Dennison's request.

"I think not, dear."

"I am," said Ruston, taking up his walking stick. "I shall be up with
the Baron this afternoon, Mrs. Dennison. Come along, Miss Valentine.
We've been having no end of palaver about Omofaga," and as they
disappeared down the cliff Mrs. Dennison heard his voice talking eagerly
to Marjory.

She felt her heart beating quickly. She had to conquer a strange
impulse to rise and hurry after them. She knew that she must be
jealous--jealous, she said to herself, trying to laugh, that he should
talk about Omofaga to other people. Nonsense! Why, he was always talking
of it! There was a stronger feeling in her, less vague, of fuller force.
It had come on her when he spoke of his going to Africa, but then it was
hard to understand, for with all her heart she thought she was still
bent on his going. It spoke more clearly now, stirred by the threat of
opposition. At first it had been the thing--the scheme--the idea--that
had caught her; she had taken the man for the thing's sake, because to
do such a thing proved him a man after her pattern. But now, as she sat
in the little garden, she dimly traced her change--she loved the scheme
because it was his. She did not shrink from testing it. "Yes," she
murmured, "if he gave it up now, I should go on with him to something
else." Then came another step--why should he not give it up? Why should
he go into banishment--he who might go near to rule England? Why should
he empty her life by going? But if he went--and she could not persuade
herself that she had power to stop his going--he must go from her side,
it must be she who gave him the stirrup-cup, she towards whom he would
look across the sea, she for whom he would store up his brief, grim
tales of victory, in whose eyes he would see the reflection of his
triumphs. Could she fill such a place in his life? She knew that she did
not yet, but she believed in herself. "I feel large enough," she said
with a smile.

Yet there was something that she had not yet touched in him--the thing
which had put that look in his eyes, a thing that for the moment at
least Marjory Valentine had touched. Why had she not? She answered, with
a strong clinging to self-approbation, that it was because she would
not. She told herself that she had asked nothing from her intercourse
with him save the play of mind on mind--it was her mind and nothing else
that her own home failed to satisfy. She recalled the scornful disgust
with which she had listened to Semingham when he hinted to her that
there was only one way to rule a man. It seemed less disgusting to her
now than when he spoke. For, in the light of that look in his eyes,
there stood revealed a new possibility--always obvious, never hitherto
thought of--that another would take and wield the lower mighty power
that she had disdained to grasp, and by the might of the lower wrest
from her the higher. Was not the lower solidly based in nature, the
higher a fanciful structure resting in no sound foundation? The moment
this spectre took form before her--the moment she grasped that the
question might lie between her and another--that it might be not what
she would take but what she could keep--her heart cried out, to ears
that shrank from the tumultuous reckless cry, that less than all was
nothing, that, if need be, all must be paid for all. And, swift on the
horror of her discovery, came the inevitable joy in it--joy that will be
silenced by no reproofs, not altogether abashed by any shame, that no
pangs can rob utterly of its existence--a thing to smother, to hide, to
rejoice in.

Yet she would not face unflinchingly what her changing mind must mean.
She tried to put it aside--to think of something, ah! of anything else,
of anything that would give her foothold.

"I love my husband," she found herself saying. "I love poor old Harry
and the children." She repeated it again and again, praying the
shibboleth to show its saving virtue. It was part of her creed, part of
her life, to be a good wife and mother--part of her traditions that
women who were not that were nothing at all, and that there was nothing
a woman might take in exchange for this one splendid, all-comprehending
virtue. To that she must stand--it was strange to be driven to argue
with herself on such a point. She mused restlessly as she sat; she
listened eagerly for her children's footsteps mounting the hill; she
prayed an interruption to rescue her from her thoughts. Just now she
would think no more about it; it was thinking about it that did all the
harm. Yet while she was alone she could not choose but surrender to the
thought of it--to the thought of what a price she must pay for her
traditions and her creed. The payment, she cried, would leave life an
empty thing. Yet it must be paid--if it must. Was it now come to that?
Was this the parting of the roads?

"I must, yet I cannot! I must not, yet I must." It was the old clash of
powers, the old conflict of commands, the old ruthless will of nature
that makes right too hard and yet fastens anguish upon sin--that makes
us yearn for and hate the higher while we love and loathe the lower.




                              CHAPTER XV.

                          THE WORK OF A WEEK.


Much went to spoil the stay at Dieppe, but the only overt trouble was
the feeble health of the Baron von Geltschmidt. The old man had rapidly
made his way into the liking of his new acquaintances. Semingham found
his dry, worldly-wise, perhaps world-weary, humour an admirable sauce to
conversation; Adela Ferrars detected kindness in him; his gallant
deference pleased Lady Semingham. They were all grieved when the cold
winds laid hold of him, forced him to keep house often, and drove him to
furs and a bath-chair, even when the sun shone most brightly. Although
they liked him, they implored him to fly south. He would not move,
finding pleasure in them, and held fast by an ever-increasing uneasy
interest in Willie Ruston. Adela quarrelled with him heartily and
energetically on this score. To risk health because anyone was
interesting was absurd; to risk it on Ruston's account most
preposterous. "I'd be ill to get away from him," she declared. The Baron
was obstinate, fatalistic as to his health, infatuated in his folly;
stay he would, while Ruston stayed. Yet what Ruston did, pleased him
not; for the better part of the man--what led him to respond to kindness
or affection, and abate something of his hardness where he met no
resistance--seemed to be conspiring with his old domineering mood to
lead him beyond all power of warning or recall.

A week had passed since Ruston paid his first visit to Mrs. Dennison in
the cottage on the cliff. It was a bright morning. The Baron was feeling
stronger; he had left his chair and walked with Adela to a seat. There
they sat side by side, in the occasional talk and easy silences of
established friendship. The Baron smoked his cigar; Adela looked idly at
the sea; but suddenly the Baron began to speak.

"I had a talk with our friend, Lord Semingham, this morning," said he.

"About anything in particular?"

"I meant it to be, but he doesn't like talk that leads anywhere in
particular."

"No, he doesn't," said Adela, with a slight smile.

The Baron sat silent for a moment, then he said,

"May I talk to you, Miss Ferrars?" and he looked at her inquiringly.

"Why, of course," she answered. "Is it about yourself, Baron? You're not
worse, are you?"

He took no notice of her question, but pointed towards the cliff.

"What is happening up there?" he asked.

Adela started. She had not realised that he meant to talk on that
subject.

He detected her shrinking and hastened to defend himself.

"Or are we to say nothing?" he asked. "Nothing? When we all see! Don't
you see? Doesn't Miss Valentine see? Is she so sad for nothing? Oh,
don't shake your head. And the other--this Mrs. Dennison? Am I to go
on?"

"No," said Adela sharply; and added, a moment later, "I know."

"And what does he mean?"

"He?" cried Adela. "Oh, he's not human."

"Nay, but he's terribly human," said the old Baron.

Adela looked round at him, but then turned away.

"I know what I would say, but I may not say it," pursued the Baron. "To
you I may not say it. I know him. He will take, if he is offered."

His voice sank to a whisper.

"Then God help her," murmured Adela under her breath, while her cheeks
flamed red.

"Yes, he will take, and he will go. Ah, he is a man to follow and to
believe in--to trust your money, your fortune, your plans, even your
secrets to; but----"

He paused, flinging away his extinct cigar.

"Well?" asked Adela in a low tone, eager in spite of her hatred of the
topic.

"Never your love," said he; and added, "yet I believe I, who am old
enough to know better, and too old to learn better, have almost given
him mine. Well, I am not a woman."

"He can't hurt you," said Adela.

"Yes, he can," said the Baron with a dreary smile.

Adela was not thinking of her companion.

"Why do you talk of it?" she asked impatiently.

"I know I was wrong."

"No, no. I mean, why do you talk of it now?"

"Because," said the Baron, "he will not. Have you seen no change in him
this week? A week ago, he laughed when I talked to him. He did not mind
me speaking--it was still a trifle--nonsense--a week ago; if you like,
an amusement, a pastime!"

"Well, and now?"

"Now he tells me to hold my tongue. And yet I am glad for one thing.
That girl will not have him for a husband."

"Glad! Why, Baron, don't you see----"

"Yes, I see. Still I am glad."

"I can't go on talking about it; but is there no hope?"

"Where is it? For the time--mind you for the time--he is under that
other woman's power."

"She's under his, you mean."

"I mean both. She was a friend of yours. Yes. She is not altogether a
bad woman; but she has had a bad fortune. Ah, there she is, and he with
her."

As he spoke, Mrs. Dennison and Ruston came by. Mrs. Dennison flung them
a glance of recognition; it was hardly more, and even for so much she
seemed to grudge the interruption. Ruston's greeting was more
ceremonious; he smiled, but his brows contracted a little, and he said
to his companion,

"Miss Ferrars isn't pleased with me."

"That hurts?" she asked lightly.

"No," he answered, after a short pause, "I don't know that it does."

But the frown dwelt a little longer on his face.

"Sit down here," she said, and they sat down in full view of Adela and
the Baron, about twenty yards off.

"She's mad," murmured Adela, and the Baron muttered assent.

It was the time of the morning when everybody was out. Presently Lord
and Lady Semingham strolled by--Lady Semingham did not see Maggie
Dennison, her husband did, and Adela caught the look in his eye. Then
down from the hill and on to the grass came Marjory Valentine. She saw
both couples, and, for a perceptible moment, stood wavering between
them. She looked pale and weary. Mrs. Dennison indicated her with the
slightest gesture.

"You were asking for her. There she is," she said to Willie Ruston.

"Well, I think I'll go and ask her."

"What?"

"To come for a walk."

"Now?"

"Why not?" he asked with a surprised smile.

As he spoke, Marjory's hesitation ended; she joined Adela and the Baron.

"How rude you are!" exclaimed Mrs. Dennison angrily, "you asked me to
come out with you."

"So I did. By Jove, so I did! But you don't walk, do you? And I feel
rather like a walk now."

"Oh, if you prefer her society----"

"Her prattle," he said, smiling, "amuses me. You and I always discuss
high matters, you see."

"She doesn't prattle, and you know it."

He looked at her for a moment. He had gone so far as to rise, but he
resumed his seat.

"What's the matter?" he asked tolerantly.

Maggie Dennison's lip quivered. The week that had passed had been a
stormy one to her. There had been a breaking-down of barriers--barriers
of honour, conscience, and pride. All she could do to gain or keep her
mastery she had done. She had all but thrown herself at his feet. She
hated to think of the things she had said or half-said; and she had seen
Marjory's eyes look wondering horror and pitying contempt at her. Of her
husband she would not think. And she had won in return--she knew not
what. It hung still in the balance. Sometimes he would seem engrossed in
her; but again he would turn to Marjory or another with a kind of
relief, as though she wearied him. And of her struggles, of the great
humiliations she suffered, of all she sacrificed to him, he seemed
unconscious. Yet, cost what it might, she could not let him go now. The
screen of Omofaga was dropped; she knew that it was the man whose life
she was resolute to fill; whether she called it love for him or what
else mattered little; it seemed rather a mere condition of existence,
necessary yet not sweet, even revolting; but its alternative was death.

She had closed her eyes for a moment under the stress of her pain. When
she opened them, he was looking at her. And the look she knew was at
last in his eyes. She put up her hand to ward it off; it woke her
horror, but it woke her delight also. She could not choose whether to
banish it, or to live in it all her life. She tried to speak, but her
utterance was choked.

"Why, I believe you're--jealous," said Willie Ruston. "But then they
always say I'm a conceited chap."

He spoke with a laugh, but he looked at her intently. The little scene
was the climax of a week's gradual betrayal. Often in all the hours they
had spent together, in all the engrossing talks they had had, something
of the kind had appeared and disappeared; he had wondered at her
changefulness, her moods of expansion and of coldness--a rapturous
greeting of him to be followed by a cold dismissal--an eager sympathy
alternating with wilful indifference. She had, too, fits of prudence,
when she would not go with him--and then spasms of recklessness when her
manner seemed to defy all restraint and mock at the disapproval of her
friends. On these puzzles--to him, preoccupied as he was and little
versed in such matters, they had seemed such--the present moment shed
its light. He recalled, with understanding, things that had passed
meaninglessly before his eyes, that he seemed to have forgotten
altogether; the ambiguous things became plain; what had been, though
plain, yet strange, fell into its ordered place and became natural. The
new relation between them proclaimed itself the interpretation and the
work of the bygone week.

Her glove lay in her lap, and he touched it lightly; the gesture
speaking of their sudden new familiarity.

Her reproach was no less eloquent; she rebuked not the thing, but the
rashness of it.

"Don't do that. They're looking," she found voice to whisper.

He withdrew his hand, and, taking off his hat, pushed the hair back from
his forehead. Presently he looked at her with an almost comical air of
perplexity; she was conscious of the glance, but she would not meet it.
He pursed his lips to whistle.

"Don't," she whispered sharply. "Don't whistle." A whistle brought her
husband to her mind.

The checked whistle rudely reflected his mingled feelings. He wished
that he had been more on his guard--against her and against himself.
There had been enough to put him on his guard; if he had been put on his
guard, this thing need not have happened. He called the thing in his
thoughts "inconvenient." He was marvellously awake to the inconvenience
of it; it was that which came uppermost in his mind as he sat by Maggie
Dennison. Yet, in spite of a phrase that sounded so cold and brutal, his
reflections paid her no little compliment; for he called the revelation
inconvenient all the more, and most of all, because he found it of
immense interest, because it satisfied suddenly and to the full a sense
of interest and expectation that had been upon him, because it seemed to
make an immense change in his mind and to alter the conditions of his
life. Had it not done all this, its inconvenience would have been much
less--to him and save in so far as he grieved for her--nay, it would
have been, in reality, nothing. It was inconvenient because it twisted
his purposes, set him at jar with himself, and cut across the orderly
lines he had laid down--and because, though it did all this, he was not
grieved nor angry at it.

He rose to his feet. Mrs. Dennison looked up quickly.

"I shall go for my walk now," he said, and he added in answer to her
silent question, "Oh, yes, alone. I've got a thing or two I want to
think about."

Her eyes dropped as he spoke. He had smiled, and she, in spite of
herself, had smiled in answer; but she could not look at him while she
smiled. He stood there for an instant, smiling still; then he grew
grave, and turned to walk away. Her sigh witnessed the relaxation of the
strain. But, after one step, he faced her again, and said, as though the
idea had just struck him,

"I say, when does Dennison come?"

"In a week," she answered.

For just a moment again, he stood still, thoughtfully looking at her.
Then he lifted his hat, wheeled round, and walked briskly off towards
the jetty at the far end of the expanse of grass. Adela Ferrars, twenty
yards off, marked his going with a sigh of relief.

Mrs. Dennison sat where she was a little while longer. Her agitation was
quickly passing, and there followed on it a feeling of calm. She seemed
to have resigned charge of herself, to have given her conduct into
another's keeping. She did not know what he would do; he had uttered no
word of pleasure or pain, praise or blame; and that question at the
last--about her husband--was ambiguous. Did he ask it, fearing Harry's
arrival, or did he think the arrival of her husband would end an awkward
position and set him free? Really, she did not know. She had done what
she could--and what she could not help. He must do what he liked--only,
knowing him, she did not think that she had set an end to their
acquaintance. And that for the moment was enough.

"A woman, Bessie," she heard a voice behind her saying, "may be anything
from a cosmic force to a clothes-peg."

"I don't know what a cosmic force is," said Lady Semingham.

"A cosmic force? Why----"

"But I don't want to know, Alfred. Why, Maggie, that's a new shade of
brown on your shoes. Where do you get them?"

Mrs. Dennison gave her bootmaker's address, and Lady Semingham told her
husband to remember it. She never remembered that he always forgot such
things.

The arrival of the Seminghams seemed to break the spell which had held
Mrs. Dennison apart from the group over against her. Adela strolled
across, followed by Marjory, and the Baron on Marjory's arm. The whole
party gathered in a cluster; but Marjory hung loosely on the outskirts
of the circle, and seemed scarcely to belong to it.

The Baron seated himself in the place Willie Ruston had left empty. The
rest stood talking for a minute or two, then Semingham put his hand in
his pocket and drew out a folded sheet of tracing-paper.

"We're all Omofagites here, aren't we?" he said; "even you, Baron, now.
Here's a plan Carlin has just sent me. It shows our territory."

Everybody crowded round to look as he unfolded it. Mrs. Dennison was
first in undisguised eagerness; and Marjory came closer, slipping her
arm through Adela Ferrars'.

"What does the blue mean?" asked Adela.

"Native settlements."

"Oh! And all that brown?--it's mostly brown."

"Brown," answered Semingham, with a slight smile, "means unexplored
country."

"I should have made it all brown," said Adela, and the Baron gave an
appreciative chuckle.

"And what are these little red crosses?" asked Mrs. Dennison, laying the
tip of her finger on one.

"Eh? What, those? Oh, let me see. Here, just hold it while I look at
Carlin's letter. He explains it all," and Lord Semingham began to fumble
in his breast-pocket.

"Dear me," said Bessie Semingham, in a tone of delicate pleasure, "they
look like tombstones."

"Hush, hush, my dear lady," cried the old Baron; "what a bad omen!"

"Tombstones," echoed Maggie Dennison thoughtfully. "So they do--just
like tombstones."

A pause fell on the group. Adela broke it.

"Well, Director, have you found your directions?" she asked briskly.

"It was a momentary lapse of memory," said Semingham with dignity.
"Those--er--little----"

"No, not tombstones," interrupted the Baron earnestly.

"Little--er--signposts are, of course, the forts belonging to the
Company. What else should they be?"

"Oh, _forts_," murmured everybody.

"They are," continued Lord Semingham apologetically, "in the nature of a
prophecy at present, as I understand."

"A very bad prophecy, according to Bessie," said Mrs. Dennison.

"I hope," said the Baron, shaking his head, "that the official name is
more correct than Lady Semingham's."

"So do I," said Marjory; and added, before she could think not to add,
and with unlucky haste, "my brother's going out, you know."

Mrs. Dennison looked at her. Then she crossed over to her, saying to
Adela,

"You never let me have a word with my own guest, except at breakfast and
bedtime. Come and walk up and down with me, Marjory."

Marjory obeyed; the group began to scatter.

"But didn't they look like tombstones, Baron?" said Bessie Semingham
again, as she sat down and made room for the old man beside her. When
she had an idea she liked it very much. He began to be voluble in his
reproof of her gloomy fancies; but she merely laughed in glee at her
ingenuity.

Adela, by a gesture, brought Semingham to her side and walked a few
paces off with him.

"Will you go with me to the post-office?" she said abruptly.

"By all means," he answered, feeling for his glass.

"Oh, you needn't get your glass to spy at me with."

"Dear, dear, you use one yourself!"

"I'll tell you myself why I'm going. You're going to send a telegram."

"Am I?"

"Yes; to invite someone to stay with you. Lord Semingham, when you find
a woman relies on a man--on one man only--in trouble, what do you
think?"

She asked the question in a level voice, looking straight before her.

"That she's fond of him."

"And does he--the man--think the same?"

"Generally. I think most men would. They're seldom backward to think it,
you know."

"Then," she said steadily, "you must think, and he must think, what you
like. I can't help it. I want you to wire and ask a man to come and stay
with you."

He turned to her in surprise.

"Tom Loring," she said, and the moment the name left her lips Semingham
hastily turned his glance away.

"Awkward--with the other fellow here," he ventured to suggest.

"Mr. Ruston doesn't choose your guests."

"But Mrs.----"

"Oh, fancy talking of awkwardness now! He used to influence her once,
you know. Perhaps he might still. Do let us try," and her voice trembled
in earnestness.

"We'll try. Will he come? He's very angry with her."

And Adela answered, still looking straight in front of her,

"I'm going to send him a wire, too."

"I'm very glad to hear it," said Lord Semingham.




                              CHAPTER XVI.

                           THE LAST BARRIERS.


Willie Ruston rested his elbows on the jetty-wall and gazed across the
harbour entrance. He had come there to think; and deliberate thinking
was a rare thing for him to set his head to. His brain dealt
generally--even with great matters, as all brains deal with small--in
rapid half-unconscious beats; the process coalescing so closely with the
decision as to be merged before it could be recognised. But about this
matter he meant to think; and the first result of his determination was
(as it often is in such a case) that nothing at all relevant would stay
by him. There was a man fishing near, and he watched the float; he
looked long at the big hotel at Puys, which faced him a mile away, and
idly wondered whether it were full; he followed the egress of a fishing
boat with strict attention. Then, in impatience, he turned round and sat
down on the stone bench and let his eyes see nothing but the flags of
the pavement. Even then he hardly thought; but after a time he became
vaguely occupied with Maggie Dennison, his mind playing to and fro over
her voice, her tricks of manner, her very gait, and at last settling
more or less resolutely on the strange revelation of herself which she
had gradually made and had consummated that day. It changed his feelings
towards her; but it did not change them to contempt. He had his ideas,
but he did not make ideal figures out of humanity; and humanity could go
very far wrong and sink very deep in its lower possibilities without
shocking him. Nor did he understand her, nor realise how great a
struggle had brought what he saw to birth. It seemed to him a thing not
unnatural, even in her, who was in much unlike most other women. There
are dominions that are not to be resisted, and we do not think people
weak simply because they are under our own influence. His surprise was
reserved for the counter-influence which he felt, and strove not to
acknowledge; his contempt for the disturbance into which he himself was
thrown. At that he was half-displeased, puzzled, and alarmed; yet that,
too, had its delight.

"What rot it is!" he muttered, in the rude dialect of self-communion,
which sums up a bewildering conflict in a word of slang.

He was afraid of himself--and his exclamation betrayed the fear. Men of
strong will are not all will; the strong will has other strong things to
fight, and the strong head has mighty rebels to hold down. That he felt;
but his fear of himself had its limits. He was not the man--as he saw
very well at this moment, and recognised with an odd mixture of pride
and humiliation--to give up his life to a passion. Had that been the
issue clearly and definitely set before him he would not have sat
doubtful on the jetty. He understood what of nobility lay in such a
temperament, and his humiliation was because it made no part of him; but
the pride overmastered, and at last he was glad to say to himself that
there was no danger of his losing all for love. Indeed, was he in love?
In love in the grand sense people talked and wrote about so much? Well,
there were other senses, and there were many degrees. The question he
weighed, or rather the struggle which he was undergoing, was between
resisting or yielding before a temptation to take into his life
something which should not absorb it, but yet in a measure alter it,
which allured him all the more enticingly because, judging as he best
could, he could see no price which must be paid for it--well, except
one. And, as the one came into his mind, it made him pause, and he mused
on it, looking at it in all lights. Sometimes he put the price as an act
of wrong which would stain him--for, apart from other, maybe greater,
maybe more fanciful obstacles, Harry Dennison held him for a
friend--sometimes as an act of weakness which would leave him
vulnerable. And, after these attempted reasonings, he would fall again
to thinking of Maggie Dennison, her voice, her manner, and the
revelation of herself; and in these picturings the reasoning died away.

There are a few deliberate sinners, a few by whom "Evil, be thou my
Good" is calmly uttered as a dedication and a sacrament, but most men do
not make up their minds to be sinners or determine in cool resolve to do
acts of the sort that lurked behind Willie Ruston's picturings. They
only fail to make up their minds not to do them. Ruston, in a fury of
impatience, swept all his musings from him--it led to nothing. It left
him where he was. He was vexing himself needlessly; he told himself that
he could not decide what he ought to do. In truth, he did not choose to
decide what it was that he chose to do. And with the thoughts that he
drove away went the depression they had carried with them. He was
confident again in himself, his destiny, his career; and in its fancied
greatness, the turmoil he had suffered sank to its small proportions. He
returned to his old standpoint, and to the old medley of pride and shame
it gave him; he might be of supreme importance to Maggie Dennison, but
she was only of some importance to him. He could live without her. But,
at present, he regarded her loss as a thing not necessary to undergo.

It was late in the day that he met young Sir Walter, who ran to him,
open-mouthed with news. Walter was afraid that the news would be
unpalatable, and could not understand such want of tact in Semingham. To
ask Tom Loring while Ruston was there argued a bluntness of perception
strange to young Sir Walter. But, be the news good or bad, he had only
to report; and report it he did straightway to his chief. Willie Ruston
smiled, and said that, if Loring did not mind meeting him, he did not
mind meeting Loring; indeed, he would welcome the opportunity of proving
to that unbeliever that there was water somewhere within a hundred miles
of Fort Imperial (which Tom in one of those articles had sturdily
denied). Then he flirted away a stone with his stick and asked if anyone
had yet told Mrs. Dennison. And, Sir Walter thinking not, he said,

"Oh, well, I'm going there. I'll tell her."

"She'll know why he's coming," said Walter, nodding his head wisely.

"Will she? Do you know?" asked Ruston with a smile--young Sir Walter's
wisdom was always sure of that tribute from him.

"If you'd seen Adela Ferrars, you'd know too. She tries to make believe
it's nothing, but she's--oh, she's----"

"Well?"

"She's all of a flutter," laughed Walter.

"You've got to the bottom of that," said Ruston in a tone of conviction.

"Still, I think it's inconsiderate of Loring; he must know that Mrs.
Dennison will find it rather awkward. But, of course, if a fellow's in
love, he won't think of that."

"I suppose not," said Willie Ruston, smiling again at this fine scorn.

Then, with a sudden impulse, struck perhaps with an envy of what he
laughed at, he put his arm through his young friend's, and exclaimed,
with a friendly confidential pressure of the hand,

"I say, Val, I wish the devil we were in Omofaga, don't you?"

"Rather!" came full and rich from his companion's lips.

"With a few thousand miles between us and everything--and everybody!"

Young Sir Walter's eyes sparkled.

"Off in three months now," he reminded his leader exultingly.

It could not be. The Fates will not help in such a fashion, it is not
their business to cut the noose a man ties round his neck--happy is he
if they do not draw it tight. With a sigh, Willie Ruston dropped his
companion's arm, and left him with no other farewell than a careless
nod. Of Tom Loring's coming he thought little. It might be that Sir
Walter had seen most of its meaning, and that Semingham was acting as a
benevolent match-maker--a character strange for him, and amusing to see
played--but, no doubt, there was a little more. Probably Tom had some
idea of turning him from his path, of combating his influence, of
disputing his power. Well, Tom had tried that once, and had failed; he
would fail again. Maggie Dennison had not hesitated to resent such
interference; she had at once (Ruston expressed it to himself) put Tom
in his right place. Tom would be no more to her at Dieppe than in
London--nay, he would be less, for any power unbroken friendship and
habit might have had then would be gone by now. Thus, though he saw the
other meaning, he made light of it, and it was as a bit of gossip
concerning Adela Ferrars, not as tidings which might affect herself,
that he told Mrs. Dennison of Tom's impending arrival.

On her the announcement had a very different effect. For her the whole
significance lay in what Ruston ignored, and none in what had caught his
fancy. He was amazed to see the rush of colour to her cheeks.

"Tom Loring coming here!" she cried in something like horror.

Again, and with a laugh, Ruston pointed out the motive of his coming, as
young Sir Walter had interpreted it; but he added, as though in
concession, and with another laugh,

"Perhaps he wants to keep his eye on me, too. He doesn't trust me
further than he can see me, you know."

Without looking at him or seeming to listen to his words, she asked, in
low, indignant tones,

"How dare he come?"

Willie Ruston opened his eyes. He did not understand so much emotion
spent on such a trifle. Say it was bad taste in Loring to come, or an
impertinence! Well, it was not a tragedy at all events. He was almost
angry with her for giving importance to it; and the importance she gave
set him wondering. But before he could translate his feeling into words,
she turned to him, leaning across the table that stood between them, and
clasping her hands.

"I can't bear to have him here now," she murmured.

"What harm will he do? You needn't see anything of him," rejoined
Ruston, more astonished at each new proof of disquietude in her.

But Tom Loring was not to be so lightly dismissed from her mind; and she
did not seem to heed when Ruston added, with a laugh,

"You got rid of him once, didn't you? I should think you could again."

"Ah, then! That was different."

He looked at her curiously. She was agitated, but there seemed to be
more than agitation. As he read it, it was fear; and discerning it, he
spoke in growing surprise and rising irritation.

"You look as if you were afraid of him."

"Afraid of him?" she broke out. "Yes, I am afraid of him."

"Of Loring?" he exclaimed in sheer wonder. "Why, in heaven's name?
Loring's not----"

He was going to say "your husband," but stopped himself.

"I can't face him," she whispered. "Oh, you know! Why do you torment me?
Or don't you know? Oh, how strange you are!"

And now there was fear in her eyes when she looked at Ruston.

He sat still a moment, and then in slow tones he said,

"I don't see what concern your affairs are of Loring's, or mine either,
by God!"

At the last word his voice rose a little, and his lips shut tight as it
left them.

"Oh, it's easy for you," she said, half in anger at him, half in scorn
of herself. "You don't know what he is--what he was--to me."

"What was Loring to you?" he asked in sharp, imperious tones--tones that
made her hurriedly cry,

"No, no; not that, not that. How could you think that of me?"

"What then?" came curt and crisp from him, her reproach falling
unheeded.

"Oh, I wish--I wish you could understand just a little! Do you think
it's all nothing to me? Do you think I don't mind?"

"I don't know what it is to you," he said doggedly. "I know it's nothing
to Loring."

"I don't believe," she went on, "that he's coming because of Adela at
all."

And as she spoke, she met his eyes for a moment, and then shrank from
them.

"Come, shall we speak plainly?" he asked with evident impatience.

"Ah, you will, I know," she wailed, with a smile and a despairing
gesture. She loved and dreaded him for it. "Not too plainly, Willie!"

His mouth relaxed.

"Why do you worry about the fellow?" he asked.

"Well, I'll speak plainly, too," she cried. "He's not a fool; and he's
an honest man. That's why I don't want him here;" and enduring only till
she had flung out the truth, she buried her face in her hands.

"I've had enough of him," said Willie Ruston, frowning. "He's always got
in my way; first about the Company--and now----"

He broke off, pushing his chair back, and rising to his feet. He walked
to the window of the little sitting-room where they were; the sun was
setting over the sea, and early dusk gathering. It was still, save for
the sound of the waves.

"Is there nobody at home?" he asked, with his back towards her.

"No. Marjory and the children have gone down to the _Rome_ to have tea
with Bessie Semingham."

He waited a moment longer, looking out, then he came back and stood
facing her. She was leaning her head on her hand. At last she spoke in a
low voice.

"He's Harry's friend," she said, "and he used to be mine; and he trusted
me."

Willie Ruston threw his head back with a little sharp jerk.

"Oh, well, I didn't come to talk about Tom Loring," he said. "If you
value his opinion so very much, why, you must keep it; that's all," and
he moved towards where his hat was lying. "But I'm afraid I can't share
my friends with him."

"Oh, I know you won't share anything with anybody," said Maggie
Dennison, her voice trembling between a sob and a laugh.

He turned instantly. His face lighted up, and the sun, casting its last
rays on her eyes, made them answer with borrowed brilliance.

"I won't share you with Loring, anyhow," he cried, walking close up to
her, and resting his hand on the table.

She laid hers gently on it.

"Don't go to Omofaga, Willie," she said.

For a moment he sheerly stared at her; then he burst into a merry
unrestrained peal of laughter. Next he lifted her hand and kissed it.

"You are the most wonderful woman in the world," said he, his mouth
quivering with amusement.

"Oh!" she exclaimed, throwing her arms wide for a moment.

"Well, what's the matter? What have I done wrong now?"

She rose and walked up and down the room.

"I wish I'd never seen you," she said from the far end of it.

"I wish I'd never seen--Tom Loring."

"Ah, that's the only thing!" she cried. "I may live or I may die, or I
may--do anything you like; but I mustn't have another friend! I mustn't
give a thought to what anybody else thinks of me!"

"You mustn't balance me against Tom Loring," he answered between his
teeth, all signs of his merriment gone now.

For a moment--not long, but seeming very long--there was silence in the
room; and, while the brief stillness reigned, she fought a last battle
against him, calling loyalty and friendship to her aid, praying their
alliance against the overbearing demand he made on her--against his
roughness, his blindness to all she suffered for him. But the strife was
short. Lifting her hands above her head, and bringing them down through
the air as with a blow, she cried,

"My God, I balance nothing against you!"

Her reward--her only reward--seemed on the instant to be hers. Willie
Ruston was transformed; his sullenness was gone; his eyes were alight
with triumph; the smile she loved was on his lips, and he had forgotten
those troubled, useless, mazy musings on the jetty. He took a quick step
towards her, holding out both his hands. She clasped them.

"Nothing?" he asked in a low tone. "Nothing, Maggie?"

She bowed her head for answer; it was the attitude of surrender, of
helplessness, and of trust, and it appealed to the softer feeling in him
which her resistance had smothered. He was strongly moved, and his face
was pale as he drew her to him and kissed her lips; but all he said was,

"Then the deuce take Tom Loring!"

It seemed to her enough. The light devil-may-care words surely covered a
pledge from him to her--something in return from him to her. At last,
surely he was hers, and her wishes his law. It was her moment; she would
ask of him now the uttermost wish of her heart--the wish that had
displaced all else--the passionate wish not to lose him--not, as it
were, to be emptied of him.

"And Omofaga?" she whispered.

His eyes looked past her, out into the dim twilight, into the broad
world--the world that she seemed to ask him to give for her, as she was
giving her world for him. He laughed again, but not as he had laughed
before. There was a note of wonder in his laugh now--of wonder that the
prayer seemed now not so utterly absurd--that he could imagine himself
doing even that--spoiling his heart of its darling ambition--for her.
Yet, even in that moment of her strongest sway, as her arms were about
him, he was swearing to himself that he would not.

She did not press for an answer. A glance into his distant eyes gave her
one, perhaps, for she sighed as though in pain. Hearing her, he bent his
look on her again. Though he might deny that last boon, he had given her
much. So she read; and, drawing herself to her full height, she released
one of her hands from his, and held it out to him. For a moment he
hesitated; then a slow smile breaking on his face, he bent and kissed
it, and she whispered over his bent head, half in triumph, half in
apology for bidding him bend his head even in love,

"I like pretending to be queen--even with you, Willie."

Her flattery, so sweet to him, because it was wrung from her all against
her will, and was for him alone of men, thrilled through him and he was
drawing her to him again when the merry chatter of a child struck on
their ears from the garden.

She shrank back.

"Hark!" she murmured. "They're coming."

"Yes," he said, with a frown. "I shall come to-morrow, Maggie."

"To-morrow? Every day?" said she.

"Well, then, every day. But to-morrow all day."

"Ah, yes, all day to-morrow."

"But I must go now."

"No, no, don't go," she said quickly. "Sit down; see, sit there. Don't
look as if you'd thought of going."

He did as she bade him, trying to assume an indifferent air.

She, too, sat down, her eyes fixed on the door. A strange look of pain
and shame spread over her face. She must bend to deceive her children,
to dread detection, to play little tricks and weave little devices
against the eyes of those for whom she had been an earthly
providence--the highest, most powerful, and best they knew. Willie
Ruston did not follow the thought that stamped its mark on her face
then, nor understand why, with a sudden gasp, she dashed her hand across
her eyes and turned to him with trembling lips, crying, in low tones,

"Ah, but I have you, Willie!"

Before he could answer her appeal, the voices were in the passage. Her
face grew calm, save for a slight frown on her brow. She shaped her lips
into a smile to meet the incomers. She shot a rapid glance of caution
and warning at him. The door was flung open, and the three children
rushed in, Madge at their head. Madge, seeing Willie Ruston, stopped
short, and her laughter died away. She turned and said,

"Marjory, here's Mr. Ruston."

None could mistake her tone for one of welcome.

Marjory Valentine came forward. She looked at neither of them, but sat
down near the table.

"Well, Madge," said Mrs. Dennison, "there's good news for you, isn't
there? Your friend's coming."

Madge, finding (as she thought) sympathy, came to her mother's knee.

"Yes, I'm glad," she said. "Are you glad, mother?"

"Oh, I don't mind," answered Mrs. Dennison, kissing her; but she could
not help one glance at Willie Ruston. Bitterly she repented it, for she
found Marjory Valentine following it with her open sorrowful eyes. She
rose abruptly, and Ruston rose also, and with brief good-nights--Madge
being kissed only on strong persuasion--took his leave. The children
flocked away to take off their hats, and Marjory was left alone with her
hostess.

The girl looked pale, weary, and sad. Mrs. Dennison was stirred to an
impulse of compassion. Walking up to where she sat, she bent down as
though to kiss her. Marjory looked up. There was a question--it seemed
to be a question--in her face. Mrs. Dennison flushed red from neck to
forehead, and then grew paler than the pallor she had pitied. The girl's
unspoken question seemed to echo hauntingly from every corner of the
little room, "Are your lips--clean?"




                              CHAPTER XVII.

                         A SOUND IN THE NIGHT.


Slow in forming, swift in acting; slow in the making, swift in the
working; slow to the summit, swift down the other slope; it is the way
of nature, and the way of the human mind. What seemed yesterday unborn
and impossible, is to-day incipient and a great way off, to-morrow
complete, present, and accomplished. After long labour a thing springs
forth full grown; to deny it, or refuse it, or fight against it, seems
now as vain as a few hours ago it was to hope for it, or to fear, or to
imagine, or conceive it. In like manner, the slow, crawling, upward
journey can be followed by every eye; its turns, its twists, its checks,
its zigzags may be recorded on a chart. Then is the brief pause--on the
summit--and the tottering incline towards the declivity. But how
describe what comes after? The dazzling rush that beats the eye, that in
its fury of advance, its paroxysm of speed, is void of halts or turns,
and, darting from point to point, covers and blurs the landscape till
there seems nothing but the moving thing; and that again, while the
watcher still tries vainly to catch its whirl, has sprung, and reached,
and ceased; and, save that there it was and here it is, he would not
know that its fierce stir had been.

Such a race runs passion to its goal, when the reins hang loose. Hours
may do what years have not done, and minutes sum more changes than long
days could stretch to hold. The world narrows till there would seem to
be nothing else existent in it--nothing of all that once held out the
promise (sure as it then claimed to be) of escape, of help, or warning.
The very promise is forgotten, the craving for its fulfilment dies away.
"Let me alone," is the only cry; and the appeal makes its own answer,
the entreaty its own concession.

Some thirty hours had passed since the last recorded scene, and Marjory
Valentine was still under Mrs. Dennison's roof. It had been hard to
stay, but the girl would not give up her self-imposed hopeless task.
Helpless she had proved, and hopeless she had become. The day had passed
with hardly a word spoken between her and her hostess. Mrs. Dennison had
been out the greater part of the time, and, when out, she had been with
Ruston. She had come in to dinner at half-past seven, and at nine had
gone to her room, pleading fatigue and a headache. Marjory had sat up a
little longer, with an unopened book on her knee. Then she also went to
bed, and tried vainly to sleep. She had left her bed now, and, wrapped
in a dressing-gown, sat in a low arm-chair near the window. It was a
dark and still night; a thick fog hung over the little garden; nothing
was to be heard save the gentle roll of a quiet sea, and the occasional
blast of a steam whistle. Marjory's watch had stopped, but she guessed
it to be somewhere in the small hours of the morning--one o'clock,
perhaps, or nearing two. There was an infinite weary time, then, before
the sun would shine again, and the oppression of the misty darkness be
lifted off. She hated the night--this night--it savoured not of rest to
her, but of death; for she was wrought to a nervous strain, and felt her
imaginings taking half-bodily shapes about her, so that she was fearful
of looking to the right hand or the left. Sleep was impossible; to try
to sleep like a surrender to the mysterious enemies round her. Time
seemed to stand still; she counted sixty once, to mark a minute's
flight, and the counting took an eternity. The house was utterly
noiseless, and she shivered at the silence. She would have given half
her life, she felt, for a ray of the sun; but half a life stretched
between her and the first break of morning. Sitting there, she heaped
terrors round her; the superstitions that hide their heads before
daytime mockery reared them now in victory and made a prey of her. The
struggle she had in her weakness entered on seemed less now with human
frailty than against the strong and evil purpose of some devil; in face
of which she was naught. How should she be? She had not, she told
herself in morbid upbraiding, even a pure motive in the fight; her
hatred of the sin had been less keen had she not once desired the love
of him that caused it, and when she arrested Maggie Dennison's kiss, she
shamed a rival in rebuking an unfaithful wife. Then she cried
rebelliously against her anguish. Why had this come on her, darkening
bright youth? Why was she compassed about with trouble? And
why--why--why did not the morning come?

The mist was thick and grey against the window. A fog-horn roared, and
the sea, regardless, repeated its even beat; behind the feeble
interruptions there sounded infinite silence. She hid her face in her
hands. Then she leapt up and flung the window open wide. The damp
fog-folds settled on her face, but she heard the sea more plainly, and
there were sounds in the air about her. It was not so terribly quiet.
She peered eagerly through the mist, but saw nothing save vague
tremulous shapes, vacant of identity. Still the world, the actual,
earthly, healthy world, was there--a refuge from imagination.

She stood looking; and, as she looked, one shape seemed to grow into a
nearer likeness of something definite. It was motionless; it differed
from the rest only in being darker and of rather sharper outline. It
must be a tree, she thought, but remembered no tree there; the garden
held only low-growing shrubs. A post? But the gate lay to the right, and
this stood on her left hand, hard by the door of the house. What then?
The terror came on her again, but she stood and looked, longing to find
some explanation for it--some meaning on which her mind could rest, and,
reassured, drive away its terrifying fancies. For the shape was large in
the mist, and she could not tell what it might mean. Was it human? On
her superstitious mood the thought flashed bright with sudden relief,
and she cried beseechingly,

"Who is it? Who is there?"

A human voice in answer would have been heaven to her, but no answer
came. With a stifled cry, she shut the window down, and stood a moment,
listening--eager, yet fearful, to hear. Hark! Yes, there was a sound!
What was it? It was a footstep on the gravel--a slow, uncertain,
wavering, intermittent step, as though of someone groping with
hesitating feet and doubtful resolution through the mist. She must know
what it was--who it was--what it meant. She started up again, laying
both hands on the window-sash. But then terror conquered curiosity;
gasping as if breath failed her and something still pursued, she ran
across the room and flung open the door. She must find someone--Maggie
or someone.

On the threshold she paused in amazement. The door of Mrs. Dennison's
room was open, and Maggie stood in the doorway, holding a candle, behind
which her face gleamed pale and her eyes shone. She was muffled in a
long white wrapper, and her dark hair fell over her shoulders. The
candle shook in her hand, but, on sight of Marjory, her lips smiled
beneath her deep shining eyes. Marjory ran to her crying,

"Is it you, Maggie?"

"Who should it be?" asked Mrs. Dennison, still smiling, so well as her
fast-beating breath allowed her. "Why aren't you in bed?"

The girl grasped her hand, and pushed her back into the room.

"Maggie, I----Hark! there it is again! There's something outside--there,
in the garden! If you open the window----"

As she spoke, Mrs. Dennison darted quick on silent naked feet to the
window, and stood by it; but she seemed rather to intercept approach to
it than to think of opening it. Indeed there was no need. The slow
uncertain step sounded again; there were five or six seeming footfalls,
and the women stood motionless, listening to them. Then there was
stillness outside, matching the hush within; till Maggie Dennison,
tearing the wrapper loose from her throat, said in low tones,

"I hear nothing outside;" and she put the candle on the table by her.
"You can see nothing for the fog," she added as she gazed through the
glass. Her tone was strangely full of relief.

"I opened the window," whispered Marjory, "and I saw--I thought I
saw--something. And then I heard--that. You heard it, Maggie?"

The girl was standing in the middle of the room, her eyes fixed on Mrs.
Dennison, who leant against the window-sash with a strained, alert,
watchful look on her face.

"I heard you open the window and call out something," she said. "That's
all I heard."

"But just now--just now as we stood here?"

Mrs. Dennison did not answer for a moment; her ear was almost against
the panes, and her face was like a runner's as he waits for the
starter's word. There was nothing but the gentle beat of the sea. Mrs.
Dennison pushed her hair back over her shoulders and sighed; her tense
frame relaxed, and the fixed smile on her lips seemed, in broadening, to
lose something of its rigidity.

"No, I didn't, you silly child," she said. "You're full of fancies,
Marjory."

The curl of her lip and the shrug of her shoulders won no attention.

"It went across the garden from the door--across towards the gate," said
Marjory, "towards the path down. I heard it. It came from near the door.
I heard it."

Mrs. Dennison shook her head. The girl sprang forward and again caught
her by the arm.

"You heard too?" she cried. "I know you heard!" and a challenge rang in
her voice.

"I didn't hear," she repeated impatiently, "but I daresay you did.
Perhaps it was a man--a thief, or somebody lost in the fog. Would you
like me to wake the footman? I can tell him to take a lantern and look
if anyone's in the garden."

Marjory took no notice of the offer.

"But if it was anyone, he'll have gone now," continued Maggie Dennison,
"your opening the window will have frightened him. You made such a
noise--you woke me up."

"Were you asleep?" came in quick question.

"Yes," answered Mrs. Dennison steadily, "I was asleep. Couldn't you
sleep?"

"Sleep? No, I couldn't sleep. I was afraid."

"You're as bad as the children," said Mrs. Dennison, laughing gently.
"Come, go back to bed. Shall I come and sit by you till it's light?"

The girl seemed not to hear; she drew nearer, searching Mrs. Dennison's
face with suspicious eyes. Maggie could not face her; she dropped her
glance to the floor and laughed nervously and fretfully. Suddenly
Marjory threw herself on the floor at her friend's feet.

"Maggie, come away from here," she beseeched. "Do come; do come away
directly. Maggie, dear, I love you so, and--and I was unkind last night.
Do come, darling! We'll go back together--back home," and she burst into
sobbing.

Maggie Dennison stood passive and motionless, her hands by her side. Her
lips quivered and she looked down at the girl kneeling at her feet.

"Won't you come?" moaned Marjory. "Oh, Maggie, there's still time!"

Mrs. Dennison knew what she meant. A strange smile came over her face.
Yes, there was time; in a sense there was time, for the uncertain
footfalls had not reached their goal--arrested by that cry from the
window, they had stopped--wavered--retreated--and were gone. Because a
girl had not slept, there was time. Yet what difference did it make that
there was still time--to-night? Since to-morrow was coming and must
come.

"Time!" she echoed in a whisper.

"For God's sake, come, Maggie! Come to-morrow--you and the children.
Come back with them to England! Maggie, I can't stay here!"

Mrs. Dennison put out her hands and took Marjory's.

"Get up," she said, almost roughly, and dragged the girl to her feet.
"You can go, Marjory; I--I suppose you're not happy here. You can go."

"And you?"

"I shan't go," said Maggie Dennison.

Marjory, standing now, shrank back from her.

"You won't go?" she whispered. "Why, what are you staying for?"

"You forget," said Mrs. Dennison coldly. "I'm waiting for my husband."

"Oh!" moaned Marjory, a world of misery and contempt in her voice.

At the tone Mrs. Dennison's face grew rigid, and, if it could be, paler
than before; she had been called "liar" to her face, and truly. It was
lost to-night her madness mourned--hoped for to-morrow that held her in
her place.

The fog was lifting outside; the darkness grew less dense; a distant,
dim, cold light began to reveal the day.

"See, it's morning," said Mrs. Dennison. "You needn't be afraid any
longer. Won't you go back to your own room, Marjory?"

Marjory nodded. She wore a helpless bewildered look, and she did not
speak. She started to cross the room, when Mrs. Dennison asked her,

"Do you mean to go this morning? I suppose the Seminghams will take you,
if you like. We can make some excuse if you like."

Marjory stood still, then she sank on a chair near her, and began to sob
quietly. Mrs. Dennison slowly walked to her, and stood by her. Then,
gently and timidly, she laid her hand on the girl's head.

"Don't cry," she said. "Why should you cry?"

Marjory clutched her hand, crying,

"Maggie, Maggie, don't, don't!"

Mrs. Dennison's eyes filled with tears. She let her hand lie passive
till the girl released it, and, looking up, said,

"I'm not going, Maggie. I shall stay. Don't send me away! Let me stay
till Mr. Dennison comes."

"What's the use? You're unhappy here."

"Can't I help you?" asked the girl, so low that it seemed as though she
were afraid to hear her own voice.

Mrs. Dennison's self-control suddenly gave way.

"Help!" she cried recklessly. "No, you can't help. Nobody can help. It's
too late for anyone to help now."

The girl raised her head with a start.

"Too late! Maggie, you mean----?"

"No, no, no," cried Mrs. Dennison, and then her eager cry died swiftly
away.

Why protest in horror? By no grace of hers was it that it was not too
late. The girl's eyes were on her, and she stammered,

"I mean nothing--nothing. Yes, you must go. I hate--no, no! Marjory,
don't push me away! Let me touch you! There's no reason I shouldn't
touch you. I mean, I love you, but--I can't have you here."

"Why not?" came from the girl in slow, strong tones.

A moment later, she sprang to her feet, her eyes full of new horror, as
the vague suspicion grew to a strange undoubting certainty.

"Who was it in the garden? Who was out there? Maggie, if I hadn't----?"

She could not end. On the last words her voice sank to a fearful
whisper; when she had uttered them--with their unfinished, yet plain and
naked, question--she hid her face in her hands, listening for the
answer.

A minute--two minutes--passed. There was no sound but Maggie Dennison's
quick breathings; once she started forward with her lips parted as if to
speak, and a look of defiance on her face; once too, entreaty, hope,
tenderness dawned for a moment. In anger or in sorrow, the truth was
hard on being uttered; but the impulse failed. She arrested the words on
her lips, and with an angry jerk of her head, said petulantly,

"Oh, you're a silly girl, and you make me silly too. There's nothing the
matter. I don't know who it was or what it was. Very likely it was
nothing. I heard nothing. It was all your imagination." Her voice grew
harder, colder, more restrained as she went on. "Don't think about what
I've said to-night--and don't chatter about it. You upset me with your
fancies. Marjory, it means nothing."

The last words were imperative in their insistence, but all the answer
Marjory made was to raise her head and ask,

"Am I to go?" while her eyes added, too plainly for Maggie Dennison not
to read them, "You know the meaning of that."

Under the entreaty and the challenge of her eyes, Mrs. Dennison could
not give the answer which it was her purpose to give--the answer which
would deny the mad hope that still filled her, the hope which still
cried that, though to-night was gone, there was to-morrow. It was the
answer she must make to all the world--which she must declare and study
to confirm in all her acts and bearing. But there--alone with the
girl--under the compelling influence of the reluctant confidence--that
impossibility of open falsehood--which the time and occasion seemed
strangely to build up between them--she could not give it plainly. She
dared not bid the girl stay, with that hope at her heart; she dared not
cast away the cloak by bidding her go.

"You must do as you like," she said at last. "I can't help you about
it."

Marjory caught at the narrow chance the answer left her; with returning
tenderness she stretched out her hands towards her friend, saying,

"Maggie, do tell me! I shall believe what you tell me."

Mrs. Dennison drew back from the contact of the outstretched hands.
Marjory rose, and for an instant they stood looking at one another. Then
Marjory turned, and walked slowly to the door. To her own room she went,
to fear and to hope, if hope she could.

Mrs. Dennison was left alone. The night was far gone, the morning coming
apace. Her lips moved, as she gazed from the window. Was it in
thanksgiving for the escape of the night, or in joy that the morrow was
already to-day? She could not tell; yes, she was glad--surely she was
glad? Yet, as at last she flung herself upon her bed, she murmured,
"He'll come early to-day," and then she sobbed in shame.




                             CHAPTER XVIII.

                    ON THE MATTER OF A RAILWAY.


Willie Ruston was half-dressed when the chamber-maid knocked at his
door. He opened it and took from her three or four letters. Laying them
on the table he finished his dressing--with him a quick process, devoid
of the pleasant lounging by which many men cheat its daily tiresomeness.
At last, when his coat was on, he walked two or three times up and down
the room, frowning, smiling for an instant, frowning long again. Then he
jerked his head impatiently as though he had had too much of his
thoughts, and, going to the table, looked at the addresses on his
letters. With a sudden access of eagerness he seized on one and tore it
open. It bore Carlin's handwriting, and he groaned to see that the four
sides were close-filled. Old Carlin was terribly verbose and roundabout
in his communications, and a bored look settled on Willie Ruston's face
as he read a wilderness of small details, skirmishes with unruly clerks,
iniquities of office-boys, lamentations on the apathy of the public, and
lastly, a conscientious account of the health of the writer's household.
With a sigh he turned the second page.

"By the way," wrote Carlin, "I have had a letter from Detchmore. He
draws back about the railway, and says the Government won't sanction
it."

Willie Ruston raced through the rest, muttering to himself as he read,
"Why the deuce didn't he wire? What an old fool it is!" and so forth.
Then he flung down the letter, put his hands deep in his pockets and
stood motionless for a few moments.

"I must go at once," he said aloud.

He stood thinking, and a rare expression stole over his face. It showed
a doubt, a hesitation, a faltering--the work and the mark of the day and
the night that were gone. He walked about again; he went to the window
and stared out, jangling the money in his pockets. For nearly five
minutes that expression was on his face. For nearly five minutes--and it
seemed no short time--he was torn by conflicting forces. For nearly five
minutes he wavered in his allegiance, and Omofaga had a rival that could
dispute its throne. Then his brow cleared and his lips shut tight again.
He had made up his mind; great as the thing was that held him where he
was, yet he must go, and the thing must wait. Wheeling round, he took up
the letter and, passing quickly through the door, went to young Sir
Walter's room, with the face of a man who knows grief and vexation but
has set wavering behind him.

It was an hour later when Adela Ferrars and the Seminghams sat down to
their coffee. A fourth plate was laid at the table, and Adela was in
very good spirits. Tom Loring had arrived; they had greeted him, and he
was upstairs making himself fit to be seen after a night-voyage; his
boat had lain three hours outside the harbour waiting for the fog to
lift. "I daresay," said Tom, "you heard our horn bellowing." But he was
here at last, and Adela was merrier than she had been in all her stay at
Dieppe. Semingham also was happy; it was a great relief to feel that
there was someone to whom responsibility properly, or at least more
properly, belonged, and an end, therefore, to all unjustifiable attempts
to saddle mere onlookers with it. And Lady Semingham perceived that her
companions were in more genial mood than lately had been their wont, and
expanded in the warmer air. When Tom came down nothing could exceed the
_empressement_ of his welcome.

The sun had scattered the last remnants of fog, and, on Semingham's
proposal, the party passed from the table to a seat in the hotel garden,
whence they could look at the sea. Here they became rather more silent;
for Adela began to feel that the hour of explanation was approaching,
and grew surer and surer that to her would be left the task. She
believed that Tom was tactful enough to spare her most of it, but
something she must say--and to say anything was terribly difficult. Lord
Semingham was treating the visit as though there were nothing behind;
and his wife had no inkling that there was anything behind. The wife's
genius for not observing was matched by the husband's wonderful power of
ignoring; and if Adela had allowed herself to translate into words the
exasperated promptings of her quick temper, she would have declared a
desire to box the ears of both of them. It would have been vulgar, but
entirely satisfactory.

At last Tom, with carefully-prepared nonchalance, asked,

"Oh, and how is Mrs. Dennison?"

Bessie Semingham assumed the question to herself.

"She's very well, thank you, Mr. Loring. Dieppe has done her a world of
good."

Adela pursed her lips together. Semingham, catching her eye, smothered a
nascent smile. Tom frowned slightly, and, leaning forward, clasped his
hands between his knees. He was guilty of wishing that Bessie Semingham
had more pressing avocations that morning.

"You see," she chirruped, "Marjory's with her, and the children dote on
Marjory, and she's got Mr. Ruston and Walter to wait on her--you know
Maggie always likes somebody in her train. Well, Alfred, why shouldn't I
say that? I like to have someone myself."

"I didn't speak," protested Semingham.

"No, but you looked funny. I always say about Maggie, Mr. Loring,
that----"

All three were listening in some embarrassment; out of the mouths of
babes come sometimes alarming things.

"That without any apparent trouble she can make her clothes look better
than anybody I know."

Lord Semingham laughed; even Adela and Tom smiled.

"What a blessed irrelevance you have, my dear," said Semingham, stroking
his wife's small hand.

Lady Semingham smiled delightedly and blushed prettily. She enjoyed
Alfred's praise. He was so _difficile_ as a rule. The exact point of the
word "irrelevance" she did not stay to consider; she had evidently said
something that pleased him. A moment later she rose with a smile,
crying,

"Why, Mr. Ruston, how good of you to come round so early!"

Willie Ruston shook hands with her in hasty politeness. A nod to
Semingham, a lift of the hat to Adela, left him face to face with Tom
Loring, who got up slowly.

"Ah, Loring, how are you?" said Willie holding out his hand. "Young Val
told me you were to arrive to-day. How did you get across? Uncommon
foggy, wasn't it?"

By this time he had taken Tom's hand and shaken it, Tom being purely
passive.

"By the way, you're all wrong about the water, you know," he continued,
in sudden remembrance. "There's enough water to supply Manchester within
ten miles of Fort Imperial. What? Why, man, I'll show you the report
when we get back to town; good water, too. I had it analysed, and--well,
it's all right; but I haven't time to talk about it now. The fact is,
Semingham, I came round to tell you that I'm off."

"Off?" exclaimed Semingham, desperately fumbling for his eyeglass.

Adela clasped her hands, and her eyes sparkled. Tom scrutinised Willie
Ruston with attentive eyes.

"Yes; to-day--in an hour; boat goes at 11:30. I've had a letter from old
Carlin. Things aren't going well. That ass Detch----By Jove, though, I
forgot you, Loring! I don't want to give you materials for another of
those articles."

His rapidity, his bustle, his good humour were all amazing.

Tom glanced in bewilderment at Adela. Adela coloured deeply. She felt
that she had no adequate reason to give for having summoned Tom Loring
to Dieppe, unless (she brightened as the thought struck her) Tom had
frightened Ruston away.

Willie seized Semingham's arm, and began to walk him (the activity
seemed all on Willie's part) quickly up and down the garden. He held
Carlin's letter in his hand, and he talked eagerly and fast, beating the
letter with his fist now and again. Bessie Semingham sat down with an
amiable smile. Adela and Tom were close together. Adela lifted her eyes
to Tom's in question.

"What?" he asked.

"Do you think it's true?" she whispered.

"He's the finest actor alive if it isn't," said Tom, watching the beats
of Ruston's fist.

"Then thank heaven! But I feel so foolish."

"Hush! here they come," said Tom.

There was no time for more.

"Tom, there's riches in it for you if we told you," laughed Semingham;
"but Ruston's going to put it all right."

Tom gave a not very easy laugh.

"Fancy old Carlin not wiring!" exclaimed Willie Ruston.

"Shall I sell?" asked Adela, trying to be frivolous.

"Hold for your life, Miss Ferrars," said Willie; and going up to Bessie
Semingham he held out his hand.

"What, are you really off? It's too bad of you, Mr. Ruston! Not that
I've seen much of you. Maggie has quite monopolised you."

Adela and Tom looked at the ground. Semingham turned his back; his smile
would not be smothered.

"Of course you're going to say good-bye to her?" pursued Lady Semingham.

Tom looked up, and Adela followed his example. They were rewarded--if it
were a reward--by seeing a slight frown--the first shadow since he had
been with them--on Ruston's brow. But he answered briskly, with a glance
at his watch,

"I can't manage it. I should miss the boat. I must write her a line."

"Oh, she'll never forgive you," cried Lady Semingham.

"Oh, yes, she will," he laughed. "It's for Omofaga, you know. Good-bye.
Good-bye. I'm awfully sorry to go. Good-bye."

He was gone. It was difficult to realise at first. His presence, the
fact of him, had filled so large a space; it had been the feature of the
place from the day he had joined them. It had been their interest and
their incubus.

For a moment the three stood staring at one another; then Semingham,
with a curious laugh, turned on his heel and went into the house. His
wife unfolded yesterday's _Morning Post_ and began to read.

"Come for a stroll," said Tom Loring to Adela.

She accompanied him in silence, and they walked a hundred yards or more
before she spoke.

"What a blessing!" she said then. "I wonder if your coming sent him
away?"

"No, it was genuine," declared Tom, with conviction.

"Then I was very wrong, or he's a most extraordinary man. I can't talk
to you about it, Mr. Loring, but you told me I might send. And I did
think it--desirable--when I wrote. I did, indeed. I hope you're not very
much annoyed?"

"Annoyed! No; I was delighted to come. And I am still more delighted
that it looks as if I wasn't wanted."

"Oh, you're wanted, anyhow," said Adela.

She was very happy in his coming, and could not help showing it a
little. Fortunately, it was tolerably certain (as she felt sometimes,
intolerably certain) that Tom Loring would not notice anything. He never
seemed to consider it possible that people might be particularly glad to
see him.

"And you can stay, can't you?" she added.

"Oh, yes; I can stay a bit. I should like to. What made you send?"

"You know. I can't possibly describe it."

"Did Semingham notice it too?"

"Yes, he did, Mr. Loring. I distrust that man--Mr. Ruston I
mean--utterly. And Maggie----"

"She's wrapped up in him?"

"Terribly. I tried to think it was his wretched Omofaga; but it's not;
it's him."

"Well, he's disposed of."

"Yes, indeed," she sighed, in complacent ignorance.

"I must go and see her, you know," said Tom, wrinkling his brow.

Adela laughed.

"What'll she say to me?" asked Tom anxiously.

"Oh, she'll be very pleasant."

"I shan't," said Tom with sudden decision.

Adela looked at him curiously.

"You mean to--to give her 'a bit of your mind?'"

"Well, yes," he answered, smiling. "I think so; don't you?"

"I should like to, if I dared."

"Why, you dare anything!" exclaimed Tom.

"Oh, no, I don't. I splash about a good deal, but I am a coward,
really."

They relapsed into silence. Presently Tom began,

"It's been awfully dull in town; nobody to speak to, except Mrs.
Cormack."

"Mrs. Cormack!" cried Adela. "I thought you hated her?"

"Well, I've thought a little better of her lately."

"To think of your making friends with Mrs. Cormack!"

"I haven't made friends with her. She's not such a bad woman as you'd
think, though."

"I think she's horrible," said Adela.

Tom gave it up.

"There was no one else," he pleaded.

"Well," retorted Adela, "when there is anyone else, you never come near
them."

The grammar was confused, but Adela could not improve it, without being
landed in unbearable plainness of speech.

"Don't I?" he asked. "Why, I come and see you."

"Oh, for twenty minutes once a month; just to keep the acquaintance
open, I suppose. It's like shutting all the gates on Ascension Day
(isn't it Ascension Day?), only the other way round, you know."

"You so often quarrel with me," said Tom.

"What nonsense!" said Adela. "Anyhow, I won't quarrel here."

Tom glanced at her. She was looking bright and happy and young. He liked
her even better here in Dieppe than in a London drawing-room. Her
conversation was not so elaborate, but it was more spontaneous and, to
his mind, pleasanter. Moreover, the sea air had put colour in her cheeks
and painted her complexion afresh. The thought strayed through Tom's
mind that she was looking quite handsome. It was the one good thing that
he did not always think about her. He went on studying her till she
suddenly turned and caught him.

"Well," she asked, with a laugh and a blush, "do I wear well?"

"You always talk as if you were seventy," said Tom reprovingly.

Adela laughed merrily. The going of Ruston and the coming of Tom were
almost too much good-fortune for one day. And Tom had come in a pleasant
mood.

"You don't really like Mrs. Cormack, do you?" she asked. "She hates me,
you know."

"Oh, if I have to choose between you----" said Tom, and stopped.

"You stop at the critical moment."

"Well, Mrs. Cormack isn't here," said Tom.

"So I shall do to pass the time?"

"Yes," he laughed; and then they both laughed.

But suddenly Adela's laugh ceased, and she jumped up.

"There's Marjory Valentine!" she exclaimed.

"What! Where?" asked Tom, rising.

"No, stay where you are, I want to speak to her. I'll come back," and,
leaving Tom, she sped after Marjory, calling her name.

Marjory looked round and hastened to meet her. She was pale and her eyes
heavy for trouble and want of sleep.

"Oh, Adela, I'm so glad to find you! I was going to look for you at the
hotel. I must talk to you."

"You shall," said Adela, taking her arm and smiling again.

She did not notice Marjory's looks; she was full of her own tidings.

"I want to ask you whether you think Lady Semingham----" began Marjory,
growing red, and in great embarrassment.

"Oh, but hear my news first," cried Adela; "Marjory, he's gone!"

"Who?"

"Why, that man Mr. Ruston."

"Gone?" echoed Marjory in amazement.

To her it seemed incredible that he should be gone--strange perhaps to
Adela, but to her incredible.

"Yes, this morning. He got a letter--something about his Company--and he
was off on the spot. And Tom--Mr. Loring (he's come, you know),
thinks--that that really was his reason, you know."

Marjory listened with wide-open eyes.

"Oh, Adela!" she said at last with a sort of shudder.

She could have believed it of no other man; she could hardly believe it
of one who now seemed to her hardly a man.

"Isn't it splendid? And he went off without seeing--without going up to
the cliff at all. I never was so delighted in my life."

Marjory was silent. No delight showed on her face; the time for that was
gone. She did not understand, and she was thinking of the night's
experience and wondering if Maggie Dennison had known that he was going.
No, she could not have known.

"But what did you want with me, or with Bessie?" asked Adela.

Marjory hesitated. The departure of Willie Ruston made a difference. She
prayed that it meant an utter difference. There was a chance; and while
there was a chance her place was in the villa on the cliff. His going
rekindled the spark of hope that almost had died in the last terrible
night.

"I think," she said slowly, "that I'll go straight back."

"And tell Maggie?" asked Adela with excited eyes.

"If she doesn't know."

Adela said nothing; the subject was too perilous. She even regretted
having said so much; but she pressed her friend's arm approvingly.

"It doesn't matter about Lady Semingham just now," said Marjory in an
absent sort of tone. "It will do later."

"You're not looking well," remarked Adela, who had at last looked at
her.

"I had a bad night."

"And how's Maggie?"

The girl paused a moment.

"I haven't seen her this morning. She sent word that she would breakfast
in bed. I'll just run up now, Adela."

She walked off rapidly. Adela watched her, feeling uneasy about her.
There was a strange constraint about her manner--a hint of something
suppressed--and it was easy to see that she was nervous and unhappy. But
Adela, making lighter of her old fears in her new-won comfort, saw only
in Marjory a grief that is very sad to bear, a sorrow that comes where
love--or what is nearly love--meets with indifference.

"She's still thinking about that creature!" said Adela to herself in
scorn and in pity. She had quite made up her mind about Willie Ruston
now. "I'm awfully sorry for her." Adela, in fact, felt very sympathetic.
For the same thing might well happen with love that rested on a worthier
object than "that creature, Willie Ruston!"

Meanwhile the creature--could he himself at the moment have quarrelled
with the word?--was carried over the waves, till the cliff and the house
on it dipped and died away. The excitement of the message and the start
was over; the duty that had been strong enough to take him away could
not yet be done. A space lay bare--exposed to the thoughts that fastened
on it. Who could have escaped their assault? Not even Willie Ruston was
proof; and his fellow-voyagers wondered at the man with the frowning
brows and fretful restless eyes. It had not been easy to do, or pleasant
to see done, this last sacrifice to the god of his life. Yet it had been
done, with hardly a hesitation. He paced the deck, saying to himself,
"She'll understand." Would any woman? If any, then, without doubt, she
was the woman. "Oh, she'll understand," he muttered petulantly, angry
with himself because he would not be convinced. Once, in despair, he
tried to tell himself that this end to it was what people would call
ordered for the best--that it was an escape for him--still more for her.
But his strong, self-penetrating sense pushed the plea aside--in him it
was hypocrisy, the merest conventionality. He had not even the
half-stifled thanksgiving for respite from a doom still longed for,
which had struggled for utterance in Maggie's sobs. Yet he had something
that might pass for it--a feeling that made even him start in the
knowledge of its degradation. By fate, or accident, or mischance--call
it what he might--there was nothing irrevocable yet. He could draw back
still. Not thanksgiving for sin averted, but a shamefaced sense of an
enforced safety made its way into his mind--till it was thrust aside by
anger at the check that had baffled him, and by the longing that was
still upon him.

Well, anyhow--for good or evil--willing or unwilling--he was away. And
she was alone in the little house on the cliff. His face softened; he
ceased to think of himself for a moment; he thought of her, as she would
look when he did not come--when he was false to a tryst never made in
words, but surely the strongest that had ever bound a man. He clenched
his fists as he stood looking from the stern of the boat, muttering
again his old plea, "She'll understand!"

Was there not the railway?




                              CHAPTER XIX.

                           PAST PRAYING FOR.


Mrs. Dennison needed not Marjory to tell her. She had received Willie
Ruston's note just as she was about to leave her bedroom. It was
scribbled in pencil on half a sheet of notepaper.

    "Am called back to England--something wrong about our railway.
    Very sorry I can't come and say good-bye. I shall run back if I
    can, but I'm afraid I may be kept in England. Will you write?

                                                      "W. R. R."

She read it, and stood as if changed to stone. "Something wrong about
our railway!" Surely an all-sufficient reason; the writer had no doubt
of that. He might be kept in England; that meant he would be, and the
writer seemed to see nothing strange in the fact that he could be. She
did not doubt the truth of what the note said. A man lying would have
piled Pelion on Ossa, reason on reason, excuse on excuse, protestation
on protestation. Besides Willie Ruston did not lie. It was just the
truth, the all-sufficient truth. There was something wrong with the
railway, so he left her. He would lose a day if he missed the boat, so
he left her without a word of farewell. The railway must not suffer for
his taking holiday; her suffering was all his holiday should make.

Slowly she tore the note into the smallest of fragments, and the
fragments fell at her feet. And his passionate words were still in her
ears, his kisses still burnt on her cheek. This was the man whom to sway
had been her darling ambition, whom to love was her great sin, whom to
know, as in this moment she seemed to know him, her bitter punishment.
In her heart she cried to heaven, "Enough, enough!"

The note was his--his to its last line, its last word, its last silence.
The man stood there, self-epitomised, callous and careless, unmerciful,
unbending, unturning; vowed to his quest, recking of naught else.
But--she clung to this, the last plank in her shipwreck--great--one of
the few for whom the general must make stepping-stones. She thought she
had been one of the few; that torn note told her error. Still, she had
held out her hands to ruin for no common clay's sake. But it was too
hard--too hard--too hard.

"Will you write?" Was he tender there? Her bitterness would not grant
him even that. He did not want her to slip away. The smallest addition
will make the greatest realm greater, and its loss sully the king's
majesty. So she must write, as she must think and dream--and remember.

Perhaps he might choose to come again--some day--and she was to be
ready!

She went downstairs. In the hall she met her children, and they said
something to her; they talked and chattered to her, and, with the
surface of her mind, she understood; and she listened and answered and
smiled. And all that they had said and she had said went away; and she
found them gone, and herself alone. Then she passed to the sitting-room,
where was Marjory Valentine, breathless from mounting the path too
quickly; and at sight of Marjory's face, she said,

"I've heard from Mr. Ruston. He has been called away," forestalling
Marjory's trembling words.

Then she sat down, and there was a long silence. She was conscious of
Marjory there, but the girl did not speak, and presently the impression
of her, which was very faint, faded altogether away, and Maggie Dennison
seemed to herself alone again--thinking, dreaming, and remembering, as
she must now think, dream, and remember--remembering the day that was
gone, thinking of what this day should have been.

She sat for an hour, still and idle, looking out across the sea, and
Marjory sat motionless behind, gazing at her with despair in her eyes.
At last the girl could bear it no longer. It was unnatural, unearthly,
to sit there like that; it was as though, by an impossibility, a dead
soul were clothed with a living breathing body. Marjory rose and came
close, and called,

"Maggie, Maggie!"

Her voice was clear and louder than her ordinary tones; she spoke as if
trying to force some one to hear.

Maggie Dennison started, looked round, and passed her hand rapidly
across her brow.

"Maggie, I--I've not done anything about going."

"Going?" echoed Maggie Dennison. But her mind was clearing now; her
brain had been stunned, not killed, and her will drove it to wakefulness
and work again. "Going? Oh, I hope not."

"You know, last night----" began Marjory, timidly, flushing, keeping
behind Mrs. Dennison's chair. "Last night we--we talked about it, but I
thought perhaps now----"

"Oh," interrupted Mrs. Dennison, "never mind last night. For goodness'
sake, forget last night. I think we were both mad last night."

Marjory made no answer; and Mrs. Dennison, her hand having swept her
brow once again, turned to her with awakened and alert eyes.

"You upset me--and then I upset you. And we both behaved like hysterical
creatures. If I told you to go, I was silly; and if you said you wanted
to go, you were silly too, Marjory. Of course, you must stop; and do
forget that--nonsense--last night."

Her tone was eager and petulant, the colour was returning to her cheeks;
she looked alive again.

Marjory leant an arm on the back of the chair, looking down into Maggie
Dennison's face.

"I will stay," she said softly, ignoring everything else, and then she
swiftly stooped and kissed Maggie's cheek.

Mrs. Dennison shivered and smiled, and, detaining the girl's head, most
graciously returned her caress. Mrs. Dennison was forgiving everything;
by forgiveness it might be that she could buy of Marjory forgetfulness.

There was a ring at the door. Marjory looked through the window.

"It's Mr. Loring," she said in a whisper.

Maggie Dennison smiled--graciously again.

"It's very kind of him to come so soon," said she.

"Shall I go?"

"Go? No, child--unless you want to. You know him too. And we've no
secrets, Tom Loring and I."

Tom Loring had mounted the hill very slowly. The giving of that "piece
of his mind" seemed not altogether easy. He might paint poor Harry's
forlorn state; Mrs. Dennison would be politely concerned and politely
sceptical about it. He might tell her again--as he had told her
before--that Willie Ruston was a knave and a villain, and she might
laugh or be angry, as her mood was; but she would not believe. Or he
might upbraid her for folly or for worse; and this was what he wished to
do. Would she listen? Probably--with a smile on her lips and mocking
little compliments on his friendly zeal and fatherly anxiety. Or she
might flash out on him, and call his charge an insult, and drive him
away; and a word from her would turn poor old Harry into his enemy.
Decidedly his task was no easy one.

It was a coward's joy that he felt when he found a third person there;
but he felt it from the bottom of his heart. Divine delay! Gracious
impossibility! How often men adore them! Tom Loring gave thanks, praying
silently that Marjory would not withdraw, shook hands as though his were
the most ordinary morning call, and began to discuss the scenery of
Dieppe, and--as became a newcomer--the incidents of his voyage.

"And while you were all peacefully in your beds, we were groping about
outside in that abominable fog," said he.

"How you must have envied us!" smiled Mrs. Dennison, and Marjory found
herself smiling in emulous hypocrisy. But her smile was very
unsuccessful, and it was well that Tom Loring's eyes were on his
hostess.

Then Mrs. Dennison began to talk about Willie Ruston and her own great
interest in him, and in the Omofaga Company. She was very good-humoured
to Tom Loring, but she did not fail to remind him how unreasonable he
had been--was still, wasn't he? The perfection of her manner frightened
Marjory and repelled her. Yet it would have seemed an effort of bravery,
had it been done with visible struggling. But it betrayed no effort, and
therefore made no show of bravery.

"So now," said Maggie Dennison, "since I haven't got Mr. Ruston to
exchange sympathy with, I must exchange hostilities with you. It will
still be about Omofaga--that's one thing."

Tom had definitely decided to put off his lecture. The old manner he had
known and mocked and admired--the "these-are-the-orders" manner--was too
strong for him. He believed he was still fond of her. He knew that he
wondered at her still. Could it be true what they told him--that she was
as a child in the hands of Willie Ruston? He hated to think that,
because it must mean that Willie Ruston was--well, not quite an ordinary
person--a conclusion Tom loathed to accept.

"And you're going to stay some time with the Seminghams? That'll be very
pleasant. And Adela will like to have you so much. Oh, you can convert
her! She's a shareholder. And you must have a talk to the old Baron.
You've heard of him? But then he believes in Mr. Ruston, as I do, so
you'll quarrel with him."

"Perhaps I shall convert him," suggested Tom.

"Oh, no, we thorough believers are past praying for; aren't we,
Marjory?"

Marjory started.

"Past praying for?" she echoed.

Her thoughts had strayed from the conversation--back to what she had
been bidden to forget; and she spoke not as one who speaks a trivial
phrase.

For an instant a gleam of something--anger or fright--shot from Maggie
Dennison's eyes. The next, she was playfully, distantly, delicately
chaffing Tom about the meaning of his sudden arrival.

"Of course _not_----" she began.

And Tom, interrupting, stopped the "Adela."

"And you stay here too?" he asked, to turn the conversation.

"Why, of course," smiled Mrs. Dennison. "After being here all this time,
it would look rather funny if I ran away just when Harry's coming. I
think he really would have a right to be aggrieved then." She paused,
and added more seriously, "Oh, yes, I shall wait here for Harry."

Then Tom Loring rose and took his leave. Mrs. Dennison entrusted him
with an invitation to the whole of the Seminghams' party to luncheon
next day ("if they don't mind squeezing into our little room," she gaily
added), and walked with him to the top of the path, waving her hand to
him in friendly farewell as he began to descend. And, after he was gone,
she stood for a while looking out to sea. Then she turned. Marjory was
in the window and saw her face as she turned. In a moment Maggie
Dennison saw her looking, and smiled brightly. But the one short instant
had been enough. The feelings first numbed, then smothered, had in that
second sprung to life, and Marjory shrank back with a little
inarticulate cry of pain and horror. Almost as she uttered it, Mrs.
Dennison was by her side.

"We'll go out this afternoon," she said. "I think I shall lie down for
an hour. We managed to rob ourselves of a good deal of sleep last night.
You'd better do the same." She paused, and then she added, "You're a
good child, Marjory. You're very kind to me."

There was a quiver in her voice, but it was only that, and it was
Marjory, not she, who burst into sobs.

"Hush, hush," whispered Maggie Dennison. "Hush, dear. Don't do that. Why
should you do that?" and she stroked the girl's hot cheek, wet with
tears. "I'm very tired, Marjory," she went on. "Do you think you can dry
your eyes--your silly eyes--and help me upstairs? I--I can hardly
stand," and, as she spoke, she swayed and caught at the curtain by her,
and held herself up by it. "No, I can go alone!" she exclaimed almost
fiercely. "Leave me alone, Marjory, I can walk. I can walk perfectly;"
and she walked steadily across the room, and Marjory heard her
unwavering step mounting the stairs to her bedroom.

But Marjory did not see her enter her room, stop for a moment over the
scraps of torn paper, still lying on the floor, stoop and gather them
one by one, then put them in an envelope, and the envelope in her purse,
and then throw herself on the bed in an agony of dumb pain, with the
look on her face that had come for a moment in the garden and came now,
fearless of being driven away, lined strong and deep, as though graven
with some sharp tool.




                              CHAPTER XX.

                       THE BARON'S CONTRIBUTION.


It may be that the Baron thought he had sucked the orange of life very
dry--at least, when the cold winds and the fog had done their work, he
accepted without passionate disinclination the hint that he must soon
take his lips from the fruit. He went to bed and made a codicil to his
will, having it executed and witnessed with every requisite formality.
Then he announced to Lord Semingham, who came to see him, that,
according to his doctor's opinion and his own, he might manage to
breathe a week longer; and Semingham, looking upon him, fancied, without
saying, that the opinion was a sanguine one. This happened five days
before Harry Dennison's arrival at Dieppe.

"I am very fortunate," said the Baron, "to have found such kind friends
for the last stage;" and he looked from Lady Semingham's flowers to
Adela's grapes. "I could have bought them, of course," he added. "I've
always been able to buy--everything."

The old man smiled as he spoke, and Semingham smiled also.

"This," continued the Baron, "is the third time I have been laid up like
this."

"There's luck in odd numbers," observed Semingham.

"But which would be luck?" asked the Baron.

"Ah, there you gravel me," admitted Semingham.

"I came here against orders, because I must needs poke my old nose into
this concern of yours----"

"Not of mine."

"Of yours and others. Well, I poked it in--and the frost has caught the
end of it."

"I don't take any particular pleasure in the concern myself," said
Semingham, "and I wish you'd kept your nose out, and yourself in a more
balmy climate."

"My dear Lord, the market is rising."

"I know," smiled Semingham. "Tom Loring can't make out who the fools are
who are buying. He said so this morning."

The Baron began to laugh, but a cough choked his mirth.

"He's an honest and an able man, your Loring; but he doesn't see clear
in everything. I've been buying, myself."

"Oh, you have?"

"Yes, and someone has been selling--selling largely--or the price would
have been driven higher. It is you, perhaps, my friend?"

"Not a share. I have the vices of an aristocracy. I am stubborn."

"Who, then?"

"It might be--Dennison."

The Baron nodded.

"But what did you want with 'em, Baron? Will they pay?"

"Oh, I doubt that. But I wanted them. Why should Dennison sell?"

"I suppose he doubts, like you."

"Perhaps it is that."

"Perhaps," said Semingham.

In the course of the next three days they had many conversations; the
talks did the Baron no good nor, as his doctor significantly said, any
harm; and when he could not talk, Semingham sat by him and told stories.
He spoke too, frequently, of Willie Ruston, and of the Company--that
interested the Baron. And at last, on the third day, they began to speak
of Maggie Dennison; but neither of them connected the two names in talk.
Indeed Semingham, according to his custom, had rushed at the possibility
of ignoring such connection. Ruston's disappearance had shown him a way;
and he embraced the happy chance. He was always ready to think that any
"fuss" was a mistake; and, as he told the Baron, Mrs. Dennison had been
in great spirits lately, cheered up, it seemed, by the prospect of her
husband's immediate arrival. The Baron smiled to hear him; then he
asked,

"Do you think she would come to see me?"

Semingham promised to ask her; and, although the Baron was fit to see
nobody the next day--for he had moved swiftly towards his journey's end
in those twenty-four hours--yet Mrs. Dennison came and was admitted;
and, at sight of the Baron, who lay yellow and gasping, forgot both her
acting and, for an instant, the reality which it hid.

"Oh!" she cried before she could stop herself, "how ill you look! Let me
make you comfortable!"

The Baron did not deny her. He had something to say to her.

"When does your husband come?" he asked.

"To-morrow," said she briefly.

She did all she could for his comfort, and then sat down by his bedside.
He had an interval of some freedom from oppression and his mind was
clear and concentrated.

"I want to tell you," he began, "something that I have done." He paused,
and added a question, "Ruston does not come back to Dieppe, I suppose?"

"I think not. He is detained on business," she answered, "and he will be
more tied when my husband leaves."

"Your husband will not long be concerned in the Omofaga," said he.

She started; the Baron told her what he had told Semingham.

"He will soon resign his place on the Board, you will see," he ended.

She sat silent.

"He will have nothing more to do with it, you will see;" and, turning to
her, he asked with a sudden spurt of vigour, "Do you know why?"

"How should I?" she answered steadily.

"And I--I have done my part too. I have left him some money (she knew
that the Baron did not mean her husband) and all the shares I held."

"You've done that?" she cried, with a sudden light in her eyes.

"You do not want to know why?"

"Oh, I know you admired him. You told me so."

"Yes, that in part. I did admire him. He was what I have never been. I
wish he was here now. I should like to look at that face of his before I
die. But it was not for his sake that I left him the money. Why, he
could get it without me if he needed it! You don't ask me why?"

In his excitement he had painfully pulled himself higher up on his
pillows, and his head was on the level with hers now. He looked right
into her eyes. She was very pale, but calm and self-controlled.

"I don't know," she said. "Why have you?"

"It will make him independent of your husband," said the Baron.

Mrs. Dennison dropped her eyes and raised them again in a swift,
questioning glance.

"Yes, and of you. He need not look to you now."

He paused and added, slowly, punctuating every word,

"You will not be necessary to him now."

Mrs. Dennison met his gaze full and straight; the Baron stretched out
his hand.

"Ah, forgive me!" he exclaimed.

"There is nothing to forgive," said she.

"I saw; I knew; I have felt it. Now he will go away; he will not lean on
you now. I have set him where he can stand alone."

A smile, half scornful and half sad, came on her face.

"You hate me," said the Baron. "But I am right."

"I was--we were never necessary to him," said she. "Ah, Baron, this is
no news you give me. I know him better than that."

He raised himself higher still, panting as he rested on his elbow. His
head craned forward towards her as he whispered,

"I'm a dying man. You can tell me."

"If you were a dead man----" she burst out passionately. Then she
suddenly recovered herself.

"My dear Baron," she went on, "I'm very glad you've done this for Mr.
Ruston."

He sank down on his pillows with a weary sigh.

"Let him alone, let him alone," he moaned. "You thought yourself
strong."

"I suppose you mean kindly," she said, speaking very coldly. "Indeed,
that you should think of me at all just now shows it. But, Baron, you
are disquieting yourself without cause."

"I'm an old man, and a sick man," he pleaded, "and you, my dear----"

"Ah, suppose I have been--whatever you like--indiscreet? Well----?"

She paused, for he made a feebly impatient gesture. Mrs. Dennison kept
silence for a moment; then in a low tone she said,

"Baron, why do you speak to a woman about such things, unless you want
her to lie to you?"

The Baron, after a moment, gave his answer, that was no answer.

"He is gone," he said.

"Yes, he is gone--to look after his railway."

"It is finished then?" he half asked, half implored, and just caught her
low-toned reply.

"Finished? Who for?" Then she suddenly raised her voice, crying, "What
is it to you? Why can't I be let alone? How dare you make me talk about
it?"

"I have done," said he, and, laying his thin yellow hand in hers, he
went on, "If you meet him again--and I think you will--tell him that I
longed to see him, as a man who is dying longs for his son. He would be
a breath of life to me in this room, where everything seems dead. He is
full of life--full as a tiger. And you can tell him----" He stopped a
moment and smiled. "You can tell him why I was a buyer of Omofagas. What
will he say?"

"What will he say?" she echoed, with wide-opened eyes, that watched the
old man's slow-moving lips.

"Will he weep?" asked the Baron.

"In God's name, don't!" she stammered.

"He will say, 'Behold, the Baron von Geltschmidt was a good man--he was
of use in the world--may he sleep in peace!' And now--how goes the
railway?"

The old man lay silent, with a grim smile on his face. The woman sat by,
with lips set tight in an agony of repression. At last she spoke.

"If I'd known you were going to tell me this, I wouldn't have come."

"It's hard, hard, hard, but----"

"Oh, not that. But--I knew it."

She rose to her feet.

"Good-bye," said the Baron. "I shan't see you again. God make it light
for you, my dear."

She would not seem to hear him. She smoothed his pillows and his scanty
straggling hair; then she kissed his forehead.

"Good-bye," she said. "I will tell Willie when I see him. I shall see
him soon."

The old man moaned softly and miserably.

"It would be better if you lay here," he said.

"Yes, I suppose so," she answered, almost listlessly. "Good-bye."

Suddenly he detained her, catching her hand.

"Do you believe in people meeting again anywhere?" he asked.

"Oh, I suppose so. No, I don't know, I'm sure."

"They've been telling me to have a priest. I call myself a Catholic, you
know. What can I say to a priest? I have done nothing but make money. If
that is a sin, it's too simple to need confession, and I've done too
much of it for absolution. How can I talk to a priest? I shall have no
priest."

She did not speak, but let him hold her hand.

"If," he went on, with a little smile, "I'm asked anywhere what I've
done, I must say, 'I've made money.' That's all I shall have to say."

She stooped low over him and whispered,

"You can say one more thing, Baron--one little thing. You once tried to
save a woman," and she kissed him again and was gone.

Outside the house, she found Semingham waiting for her.

"Oh, I say, Mrs. Dennison," he cried, "Harry's come. He got away a day
earlier than he expected. I met him driving up towards your house."

For just a moment she stood aghast. It came upon her with a shock;
between a respite of a day and the actual terrible now, there had seemed
a gulf.

"Is he there--at the house--now?" she asked.

Semingham nodded.

"Will you walk up with me?" she asked eagerly. "I must go directly, you
know. He'll be so sorry not to find me there. Do you mind coming? I'm
tired."

He offered his arm, and she almost clutched at it, but she walked with
nervous quickness.

"He's looking very well," said Semingham. "A bit fagged, and so on, you
know, of course, but he'll soon get all right here."

"Yes, yes, very soon," she replied absently, quickening her pace till he
had to force his to match it. But, half-way up the hill, she stopped
suddenly, breathing rapidly.

"Yes, take a rest, we've been bucketing," said he.

"Did he ask after me?"

"Yes; directly."

"And you said----?"

"Oh, that you were all right, Mrs. Dennison."

"Thanks. Has he seen Mr. Loring?"

"No; but he knew he had come here. He told me so."

"Well, I needn't take you right up, need I?"

Semingham thought of some jest about not intruding on the sacred scene,
but the jest did not come. Somehow he shrank from it. Mrs. Dennison did
not.

"We shall want to fall on one another's necks," said she, smiling. "And
you'd feel in the way. You hate honest emotions, you know."

He nodded, lifted his hat, and turned. On his way down alone, he stopped
once for a moment and exclaimed,

"Good heavens! And I believe she'd rather meet the devil himself. She is
a woman!"

Mrs. Dennison pursued her way at a gentler pace. Before she came in
sight, she heard her children's delighted chatterings, and, a moment
later, Harry's hearty tones. His voice brought to her, in fullest force,
the thing that was always with her--with her as the cloak that a man
hath upon him, and as the girdle that he is always girded withal.

When the children saw her, they ran to her, seizing her hands and
dragging her towards Harry. A little way off stood Marjory Valentine,
with a nervous smile on her lips. Harry himself stood waiting, and Mrs.
Dennison walked up to him and kissed him. Not till that was done did she
speak or look him in the face. He returned her kiss, and then, talking
rapidly, she made him sit down, and sat herself, and took her little boy
on her knee. And she called Marjory, telling her jokingly that she was
one of the family.

Harry began to talk of his journey, and they all joined in. Then he grew
silent, and the children chattered more about the delights of Dieppe,
and how all would be perfect now that father was come. And, under cover
of their chatter, Maggie Dennison stole a long covert glance at her
husband.

"And Tom's here, father," cried the little boy on her lap exultingly.

"Yes," chimed in Madge, "and Mr. Ruston's gone."

There was a momentary pause; then Mrs. Dennison, in her calmest voice,
began to tell her husband of the sickness of the Baron. And over Harry
Dennison's face there rested a new look, and she felt it on her as she
talked of the Baron. She had seen him before unsatisfied, puzzled, and
bewildered by her, but never before with this look on his face. It
seemed to her half entreaty and half suspicion. It was plain for
everyone to see. He kept his eyes on her, and she knew that Marjory must
be reading him as she read him. And under that look she went on talking
about the Baron. The look did not frighten her. She did not fear his
suspicions, for she believed he would still take her word against all
the world--ay, against the plainest proof. But she almost broke under
the burden of it; it made her heart sick with pity for him. She longed
to cry out, then and there, "It isn't true, Harry, my poor dear, it
isn't true." She could tell him that--it would not be all a lie. And
when the children went away to prepare for lunch, she did much that very
thing; for, with a laughing glance of apology at Marjory, she sat on her
husband's knee and kissed him twice on either check, whispering,

"I'm so glad you've come, Harry."

And he caught her to him with sudden violence--unlike his usual manner,
and looked into her eyes and kissed her. Then they rose, and he turned
towards the house.

For a moment Marjory and Mrs. Dennison were alone together. Mrs.
Dennison spoke in a loud clear voice--a voice her husband must hear.

"We're shamefully foolish, aren't we, Marjory?"

The girl made no answer, but, as she looked at Maggie Dennison, she
burst into a sudden convulsive sob.

"Hush, hush," whispered Maggie eagerly. "My God! if I can, you can!"

So they went in and joined the children at their merry noisy meal.




                              CHAPTER XXI.

                         A JOINT IN HIS ARMOUR.


Willie Ruston slept, on the night following his return to London, in the
Carlins' house at Hampstead. The all-important question of the railway
made a consultation necessary, and Ruston's indisposition to face his
solitary rooms caused him to accept gladly the proffered hospitality.
The little cramped place was always a refuge and a rest; there he could
best rejoice over a victory or forget a temporary defeat. There he fled
now, in the turmoil of his mind. The question of the railway had hurried
him from Dieppe, but it could not carry away from him the memories of
Dieppe. Yet that was the office he had already begun to ask of it--of it
and of the quiet busy life at Hampstead, where he lingered till a week
stretched to two and to three, spending his days at work in the City,
and his evenings, after his romp with the children, in earnest and eager
talk and speculation. He regretted bitterly his going to Dieppe. He had
done what he condemned; he had raised up a perpetual reproach and a
possible danger. He was not a man who could dismiss such a thing with a
laugh or a sneer, with a pang of penitence and a swift reaction to the
low levels of morality, with a regret for imprudence and a prayer
against consequences. His nature was too deep, and the influence he had
met too strong, for any of these to be enough. Yet he had suffered the
question of the railway to drag him away at a moment's notice; and he
was persuaded that he must take his leaving as setting an end to all
that had passed. All that must be put behind; forgetfulness in thought
might be a relief impossible to attain, a relief that he would be
ashamed of striving to attain; but forgetfulness in act seemed a duty to
be done. In his undeviating reference of everything to his own work in
life and his neglect of any other touchstone, he erected into an
obligation what to another would have been a shameless matter of course;
or, again, to yet another, a source of shame-faced relief. His sins were
sin first against himself, in the second degree only against the
participant in them; his preoccupation with their first quality went far
to blind him to the second.

Yet he was very sorry for Maggie Dennison. Nay, those words were
ludicrously feeble for the meaning he wanted from them. Acutely
conscious of having done her a wrong, he was vaguely aware that he might
underestimate the wrong, and remembered uneasily how she had told him
that he did not understand, and despaired because he could not
understand. He felt more for her now--much more, it seemed to him; but
the consciousness of failure to put himself where she stood dogged him,
making him afraid sometimes that he could not realise her sufferings,
sometimes that he was imputing to her fictitious tortures and a sense of
ignominy which was not her own. Searching light, he began to talk to
Carlin in general terms, of course, and by way of chance discourse; and
he ran up against a curious stratum of Puritanism imbedded amongst the
man's elastic principles. The narrowest and harshest judgment of an
erring woman accompanied the supple trader and witnessed the surviving
barbarian in Mr. Carlin; an accidental distant allusion displayed an
equally relentless attitude in his meek hard-working little wife. Willie
Ruston drew in his feelers, and, aghast at the evil these opinions
stamped as the product of his acts, declared for a moment that his life
must be the only and insufficient atonement. The moment was a brief one.
He dismissed the opinions with a curse, their authors with a smile, and
did not scorn to take for comfort even Maggie Dennison's own enthusiasm
for his work. That had drawn them together; that must rule and limit the
connection which it had created. An end--a bound--a peremptory stop
(there was still time to stop) was the thing. She would see that, as he
saw it. God knew (he said to himself) what a wrench it was--for she
meant more to him than he had ever conceived a woman could mean; but the
wrench must be undergone. He would rather die than wreck his work; and
she, he knew, rather die than prove a wrecking siren to him.

Suddenly, across the desponding stubbornness of his resolves, flashed,
with a bright white light, the news of the Baron's legacy, accompanying,
but, after a hasty regretful thought and a kindly regretful smile,
obliterating the fact of the Baron's death. Half the steps upward, he
felt, which he had set himself painfully and with impatient labour to
cut, were hewn deep and smooth for his feet; he had now but to tread,
and lift his foot and tread again. From a paid servant of his Company,
powerful only by a secret influence unbased on any substantial
foundation, he leapt to the position of a shareholder with a larger
stake than any man besides; no intrigue could shake him now, no sudden
gust of petulant impatience at the tardiness of results displace him. He
had never thought of this motive behind the Baron's large purchases of
Omofaga shares; as he thought of it, he had not been himself had he not
smiled. And his smile was of the same quality as had burst on his face
when first Maggie Dennison dropped the veil and owned his sway.

One day he did not go down to the city, but spent his time wandering on
the heath, mapping out what he would do in the fast-approaching days in
Omofaga. The prospects were clearing; he had had two interviews with
Lord Detchmore, and the Minister had fallen back from his own objections
on to the scruples of his colleagues. It was a promising sign, and
Willie was pressing his advantage. The fall in the shares had been
checked; Tom Loring wrote no more; and Mrs. Carlin had forgotten to
mourn the extinct coal business. He came home, with a buoyant step, at
four o'clock, to find Carlin awaiting him with dismayed face. There was
the worst of news from Queen Street. Mr. Dennison had written announcing
resignation of his place on the Board.

"It's a staggering blow," said Carlin, thrusting his hands into his
pockets. "Can't you bring him round? Why is he doing it?"

"Well, what does he say?" asked Ruston, a frown on his brow.

"Oh, some nonsense--pressure of other business or something of that
kind. Can't you go and see him, Willie? He's back in town. He writes
from Curzon Street."

"I don't know why he does it," said Ruston slowly. "I knew he'd been
selling out."

"He hasn't made money at that."

"No. I've made the profit there," said Ruston, with a sudden smile.

"The Baron bought 'em, eh?" laughed Carlin. "You generally come out
right side up, Willie. You'll go and see him, though, won't you?"

Yes. He would go. That was the resolution which in a moment he reached.
If there were danger, he must face it, if there were calamity, he must
know it. He would go and see Harry Dennison.

As he was, on the stroke of half-past four, he jumped into a hansom-cab,
and bade the man drive to Curzon Street.

Harry was not at home--nor Mrs. Dennison, added the servant. But both
were expected soon.

"I'll wait," said Willie, and he was shown up into the drawing-room.

As the servant opened the door, he said in his low respectful tones,

"Mrs. Cormack is here, sir, waiting for Mrs. Dennison."

A moment later Willie Ruston was overwhelmed in a shrilly enthusiastic
greeting. Mrs. Cormack had been in despair from _ennui_; Maggie's delay
was endless, and Mr. Ruston was in verity a godsend. Indeed there was
every appearance of sincerity in the lady's welcome. She stood and
looked at him with an expression of most wicked and mischievous
pleasure. The remorse detected by Tom Loring was not visible now; pure
delight reigned supreme, and gave free scope to her frivolous
fearlessness.

"_Enfin!_" she said. "Behold the villain of the piece!"

He opened his eyes in questioning.

"Oh, you think to deceive me too? Why, I have prophesied it."

"You are," said Willie, standing on the hearth-rug, and gazing at her
nervous restless figure, so rich in half-expressed hints too subtle for
language, "the most outrageous of women, Mrs. Cormack. Fortunately you
have a fling at everybody, and the saints come off as badly as the
sinners."

A shrug asserted her opinion of his pretences. He answered,

"I really am so unfortunate as not to have the least idea what you're
driving at."

An inarticulate scornful little sound greeted this protest.

"Oh, well, I shall wait till you say something," remarked Willie, with a
laugh. "I can't deny villainies wholesale, and I can't argue against
Gallic ejaculations."

"You still come here?" she asked, ignoring his rudeness, and coming to
close quarters with native audacity.

He looked at her for a moment, and then walked up to her chair, and
stood over her. She leant back, gazing up at him with a smile.

"Look here! Don't talk nonsense," he said brusquely; "even such talk as
yours may do harm with fools."

"Fools!" she echoed. "You mean----?"

"More than half the world," he interrupted.

"Including----?" she began again in mockery.

"Some of our acquaintance," he answered, with the glimmer of a smile.

"Ah, I thought you were angry!" she cried, pointing at the smile on his
lips.

"I shall be, if you don't hold your tongue."

"You beg me to be silent, Mr. Ruston?"

"I desire you not to chatter about me, Mrs. Cormack."

"Ah, what politeness! I shall say what I please," and she rose and stood
facing him defiantly.

"I wish," he said, "that I could tell you what they do to gossiping
women in Omofaga. It is so very disagreeable--and appropriate."

"Oh, I don't mind hearing."

"I can believe it, but I mind saying."

She flushed, and her breath came more quickly.

"No doubt you will enforce the treatment--in your own interest," she
said.

"You won't be there," replied he, with affected regret.

"Well, here I shall say what I please."

"And who will listen?"

"One man, at least," she cried, in incautious anger. "Ah, you'd like to
beat me, wouldn't you?"

"Why suggest the impossible?" he asked, smiling. "I can't beat
every----" he paused, and added with deliberateness, "every
vulgar-minded woman in London;" and turning his back on her, he sat down
and took up a newspaper that lay on the table.

For full five or six minutes Mrs. Cormack sat silent. Willie Ruston
glanced through the leading article, and turned the paper, folding it
neatly. There was a letter from a correspondent on the subject of the
watersheds of Central South Africa, and he was reading it with
attention. He thought that he recognised Tom Loring's hand. The
watersheds of Omofaga were not given their due. Ah, and here was that
old falsehood about arid wastes round Fort Imperial!

"By Jove, it's too bad!" he exclaimed aloud.

Mrs. Cormack, who had for the last few moments been watching him, first
with a frown, then with a half-incredulous, half-amazed smile, burst out
into laughter.

"Really, one might as well be offended with a grizzly bear!" she cried.

He put down the paper, and met her gaze.

"How in the world," she went on, "does she--there, I beg your pardon.
How does anyone endure you, Mr. Ruston?"

As she spoke, before he could answer, the door opened, and Harry
Dennison came in. He entered with a hesitating step. After greeting Mrs.
Cormack, he advanced towards Ruston. The latter held out his hand, and
Harry took it. He did not look Ruston in the eyes.

"How are you?" said he. "You want to see me?"

"Well, for a moment, if you can spare the time--on business."

"Is it about my letter to Carlin?"

Ruston nodded. Mrs. Cormack kept a close watch.

"I--I can't alter that," said Harry, in a confused way. "Sir George is
so crippled now, so much of the work falls on me; I have really no
time."

"You might have left us your name."

"I couldn't do that, could I? Suppose you came to grief?" and he laughed
uncomfortably.

Willie Ruston was afflicted by a sense of weakness--a vulnerability new
in his experience--forbidding him to be urgent with the renegade. Had
Carlin been present, he would have stood astounded at his chief's
tonguetiedness. Mrs. Cormack smiled at it, and her smile, caught in a
swift glance by Ruston, spurred him to a voluble appeal, that sounded to
himself hollow and ineffective. It had no effect on Harry Dennison, who
said little, but shook his head with unfailing resolution. Mrs. Cormack
could not resist the temptation to offer matters an opportunity of
development.

"But what does Maggie say to your desertion?" she asked in an innocently
playful way.

Harry seemed nonplussed at the question, and Willie Ruston interposed.

"We needn't bring Mrs. Dennison into it," he said, smiling. "It's a
matter of business, and if Dennison has made up his mind----"

He ended with a shrug, and took up his hat.

"I--I think so, Ruston," stumbled Harry.

"Where is Maggie?" asked Mrs. Cormack curiously. "They told me she would
be in soon."

"I don't know," said Harry. "She went out driving. She's sometimes late
in coming back."

Ruston was shaking hands with Mrs. Cormack, and, when he walked out,
Harry followed him. The two men went downstairs in silence. Harry opened
the front door. Willie Ruston held out his hand, but Harry did not this
time take it. Holding the door-knob, he looked at his visitor with a
puzzled entreaty in his eyes, and his visitor suddenly felt sorry for
him.

"I hope Mrs. Dennison is well?" said Ruston, after a pause.

"No," answered Harry, with rough abruptness. "She's not well. I knew how
it would be; I told you. You would go."

"My dear fellow----"

"You would talk to her about your miserable Company--our Company, if you
like. I knew it would do her harm. I told you so."

He was pouring out his incoherent charges and repetitions in a fretful
petulance.

"The doctor says her nerves are all wrong; she must be left alone. I see
it. She's not herself."

"Then that," said Ruston, "is the real reason why you're severing
yourself from us?"

"I don't want her to hear anything more about it; she got absorbed in
it. I told you she would, but you wouldn't listen. Tom Loring thought
just the same. But you would go."

"Is she ill?"

"Oh, I don't know that she's ill. She's--she's not herself. She's
strange."

The note of distress in his voice grew more acute as he went on.

"I'm very sorry," said Willie, baldly. "Give her my best----"

"If you want to see me again about it, I--you'll always know where to
find me in the City, won't you?" He shuffled his feet nervously, and
twisted the door-knob as he spoke.

"You mean," asked Ruston, slowly, "that I'd better not come here?"

"Well, yes--just now," mumbled Harry; and he added apologetically,
"She's seeing very few people just now, you know."

"As you please, of course," said Ruston, shortly. "I daresay you're
right. I should like to say, Dennison, that I did not intend----." He
suddenly stopped short. There was no need to rush unbidden into more
falseness. "Good-bye," he said.

Harry took the offered hand in a limp grasp, but his eyes did not leave
the ground. A moment later the door closed, and Ruston was alone
outside--knowing that he had been turned out--in however ineffective
blundering manner, yet, in fact, turned out--and by Harry Dennison. That
Harry knew nothing, he hardly felt as a comfort; that perhaps he
suspected hardly as a danger. He was angry and humiliated that such a
thing should happen, and that he should be powerless to prevent, and
without title to resent, the blow.

Looking up he caught sight dimly in the dim light of a lithe figure and
a mocking face. Mrs. Cormack had regained her own house by means of the
little gate, and stood leaning over the balcony smiling at him like some
disguised fiend in a ballet or opera-bouffe. He heard a tinkling laugh.
Had she listened? She was capable of it, and if she had, it might well
be that she had caught a word or two. But perhaps his air and attitude
were enough to tell the tale. She craned her neck over the parapet, and
called to him.

"I hope we shall see you soon again. Of course, you'll be coming to see
Maggie soon?"

"Oh, soon, I hope," he answered sturdily, and the low tinkle of laughter
rang out again in answer.

Without more, he turned on his heel and walked down the street, a morose
frown on his brow.

He had been gone some half-hour when, just before eight o'clock, Mrs.
Dennison's victoria drove quickly up to the door. The evening was chilly
and she was wearing her furs. Her face rose pale and rigid above them;
and as she walked to the house, her steps dragged as though in
weariness. She did not go upstairs, but knocked, almost timidly, at the
door of her husband's study. Entering in obedience to his call, she
found him sitting in his deep leathern arm-chair by the fire. She leant
her arm on the back and stared over his head into the fire.

"Anyone been, Harry?" she asked.

He lifted his eyes with a start.

"Is it you, Maggie?" he cried, leaping up and seizing her hand. "Why,
how cold you are, dear! Come and sit by the fire."

She did as he bade her.

"Any visitors?" she asked again.

"Ruston," he answered, turning and poking the fire as he did so. "He
came to see me about the Company, you know."

"Is he long gone?"

"Yes, some time."

"He was angry, was he?"

"Yes, Maggie. But I stuck to it. I won't have anything more to do with
the thing."

His petulance betrayed itself again in his voice. She said nothing, and,
after a moment, he asked anxiously,

"Do you mind much? You know the doctor----?"

"Oh, the doctor! No, Harry, I don't mind. Do as you like. He can get on
without us."

"If you really mind, I'll try----"

"No, no, no," she burst out. "You're quite right. Of course you're
right. I don't want you to go on. I'm tired of it too."

"Are you?" he asked, with a face suddenly brightening. "Are you really?
Then I'm glad I told Ruston not to come bothering about it here."

Had he been listening, he could have heard the sharp indrawing of her
breath.

"What do you mean?" she asked.

"Why, I told him not to come and see you till--till you were stronger."

She shot a terrified glance at him. His expression was merely anxious
and, according to its wont when he was in a difficulty, apologetic.

"And he won't be here much longer now," he added, comfortingly.

"No, not much," she forced herself to murmur.

"Won't you go and dress for dinner?" he asked, after a moment. "It's
ordered for a quarter-past, and it's more than that now."

"Is it? I'll come directly. You go, and I'll follow you. I shan't be
long."

He came near to where she sat.

"Are you feeling better?" he asked.

"Oh, Harry, Harry, I'm well, perfectly well! You and your doctor!" and
she broke into an impatient laugh. "You'll persuade me into the grave
before you've done."

He looked at her for a moment, and then, shaping his lips to whistle,
sounded a few dreary notes and stole out of the room.

She heard the door close, and, sitting up, stretched her arms over her
head. Then she sighed for relief at his going. It was much to be alone.




                             CHAPTER XXII.

                         A TOAST IN CHAMPAGNE.


"A month to-day!" said Lady Valentine, pausing in her writing (she had
just set "Octr. 10th" at the head of her paper) and gazing sorrowfully
across the room at Marjory.

Marjory knew well what she meant. The poor woman was counting the days
that still lay between her and the departure of her son.

"Now don't, mother," protested Marjory.

"Oh, I know I'm silly. I met Mr. Ruston at the Seminghams' yesterday,
and he told me that there wasn't the least danger, and that it was a
glorious chance for Walter--just what you said from the first, dear--and
that Walter could run over and see me in about eighteen months' time.
Oh, but, Marjory, I know it's dangerous!"

Marjory rose and crossed over to where her mother sat.

"You must be a Spartan matron, dear," said she. "You can't keep Walter
in leading strings all his life."

"No; but he might have stayed here, and got on, and gone into
Parliament, and so on." She paused and added, "Like Evan, you know."

Marjory coloured--more from self-reproach than embarrassment. She had
gone in these last weeks terribly near to forgetting poor Evan's
existence.

"Evan came in while I was at the Seminghams'. He looked so dull, poor
fellow. I--I asked him to dinner, Marjory. He hasn't been here for a
long while. We haven't seen nearly as much of him since we knew Mr.
Ruston. I don't think they like one another."

"You know why he hasn't come here," said Marjory softly.

"He spent a week with me while you were at Dieppe. He seemed to like to
hear about you."

A smile of sad patience appeared on Marjory's face.

"Oh, my dear, you are such a bad hinter," she half laughed, half moaned.

"Poor Evan! I'm very sorry for him; but I can't help it, can I?"

"It would have been so nice."

"And you used to be such a mercenary creature!"

"Ah, well, my dear, I want to keep one of my children with me. But, if
it can't be, it can't."

Marjory bent down and whispered in her mother's ear, "I'm not going to
Omofaga, dear."

"Well, I used to be half afraid of it," admitted Lady Valentine (she
forgot that she had half hoped it also); "but you never seem to be
interested in him now. Do you mind Evan coming to dinner?"

"Oh, no," said Marjory.

Since her return from Dieppe she had seemed to "mind" nothing.
Relaxation of the strain under which her days passed there had left her
numbed. She was conscious only of a passionate shrinking from the sight
or company of the two people who had there filled her life. To meet them
again forced her back in thought to that dreary mysterious night with
its unsolved riddle, that she feared seeking to answer.

Her mother had called on Maggie Dennison, and came back with a flow of
kindly lamentations over Maggie's white cheeks and listless weary air.
Her brother was constantly with Ruston, and tried to persuade her to
join parties of which he was to be one. She fenced with both of them,
escaping on one plea and another; and Maggie's acquiescence in her
absence, no less than Ruston's failure to make a chance of meeting her,
strengthened her resolve to remain aloof.

Young Sir Walter also came to dinner that night; he was very gay and
chatty, full of Omofaga and his fast-approaching expedition. He greeted
Evan Haselden with a manner that claimed at least equality; nay, he
lectured him a little on the ignorant interference of a stay-at-home
House of Commons with the work of the men on the spot, in South Africa
and elsewhere; people on this side would not give a man a free hand, he
complained, and exhorted Evan to take no part in such ill-advised
meddling.

Hence he was led on to the topic he was never now far away from--Willie
Ruston--and he reproached his mother and sister for their want of
attention to the hero.

This was the first gleam of light for poor Evan Haselden, for it told
him that Willie Ruston was not, as he had feared, a successful rival. He
rejoiced at Lady Valentine's hinted dislike of Ruston, and anxiously
studied Marjory's face in hope of detecting a like disposition. But his
vanity led him to return Walter's lecture, and he added an innuendo
concerning the unscrupulousness of adventurers who cloaked money-making
under specious pretences. Walter flared up in a moment, and the dinner
ended in something like a dispute between the two young men.

"Well, Dennison's found him out, anyhow," said Evan bitterly. "He's cut
the whole concern."

"We can do without Dennison," said young Sir Walter scornfully.

When the meal was finished, young Sir Walter, treating his friend
without ceremony, carelessly pleaded an engagement, and went out. Lady
Valentine, interpreting Evan's glances, and hoping against hope, seized
the chance of leaving him alone with her daughter. Marjory watched the
manoeuvre without thwarting it. Her heart was more dead to Evan than it
had ever been. Her experiences at Dieppe had aged her mind, and she
found him less capable of stirring any feeling in her than even in the
days when she had half made a hero out of Willie Ruston.

She waited for his words in resignation; and he, acute enough to mark
her moods, began as a man begins who rushes on anticipated defeat. What
is unintelligible seems most irresistible, and he knew not at what point
to attack her indifference. He saw the change in her; he could have
dated its beginning. The cause he found somehow in Ruston, but yet it
was clear to him that she did not think of Ruston as a suitor--almost
clear that she heard his name and thought of him with repulsion--and
that the attraction he had once exercised over her was gone.

The weary talk wore to its close, ending with angry petulance on his
side, and, at last, on hers with a grief that was half anger. He could
not believe in her decision, unless there were one who had displaced
him; and, seeing none save Ruston, in spite of his own convictions, he
broke at last into a demand to be told whether she thought of him.
Marjory started in horror, crying, "No, no," and, for all Evan's
preoccupation, her vehemence amazed him.

"Oh, you've found him out too, perhaps," he sneered. "You've found him
out by now. All the same, it was his fault that you didn't care for me
before."

"Evan," she implored, "do, pray, not talk like that. There's not a man
in the whole world that I would not have for my husband rather than
him."

"Now," he repeated; "but I'm speaking of before."

Half angry again at that he should allow himself such an insinuation,
she yet liked him too well, and felt too unhappy to be insincere.

"Well," she said with a troubled smile, "if you like, I've found him
out."

"Then, Marjory," cried Evan, in a spasm of reviving hope, "if that
fellow's out of the way----"

But she would not hear him, and he flung himself out of the house with a
rudeness that his love pardoned.

She heard him go, in aching sorrow that he, who felt few things deeply,
should feel this one so deeply. Then, following the calls of society,
which are followed in spite of most troubles, she, pale-faced and sad,
and her mother, almost weeping in motherly distress, dressed themselves
to go to a party. Lady Semingham was at home that night.

At the party all was gay and bright. Lady Semingham was chattering to
Mr. Otto Heather. Semingham was trying to make Mr. Foster Belford
understand the story of the Baron and Willie Ruston, Lord Detchmore, who
had come in from a public dinner, was conspicuous in his blue riband,
and was listening to Adela Ferrars with a smile on his face. Marjory sat
down in a corner, hoping to escape introductions, and, when an old
friend carried her mother off to eat an ice, she kept her place.
Presently she heard cried, "Mrs. Dennison," and Maggie came in with her
usual grace. It seemed as though the last few months were blotted out,
and they were all again at that first party at Mrs. Dennison's where
Willie Ruston had made his _entrée_. The illusion was not to lack
confirmation, for, a moment later, Ruston himself was announced, and the
sound of his name made Adela turn her head for one swift moment from her
distinguished companion.

"Ah!" said Lord Detchmore, "then I must go. If I talk to him any more
I'm a lost man."

"There's Mr. Loring in the corner--no, not that corner; that's Marjory
Valentine. He will take your side."

"Why are they all in corners?" asked Detchmore.

"They don't want to be trodden on," said Adela, with a grimace. "You'd
better take one too."

"There's Mrs. Dennison in a third corner. Shall I take that one, or
should I get trodden on there?"

Adela looked up swiftly. His remark hinted at gossip afloat.

"Take one for yourself," she began, with an uneasy laugh. But the laugh
suddenly became genuine for the very absurdity of the thing. "We'll go
and join Mr. Loring, shall we?" she proposed.

Lord Detchmore acquiesced, and they walked over to where Tom stood. On
their way, to their consternation, they encountered Willie Ruston.

"Now we're in for it," breathed Detchmore in low tones. But Ruston, with
a bow, passed on, going straight as an arrow towards where Maggie
Dennison sat. Lord Detchmore raised his eyebrows, Adela shut her fan
with a click, Tom Loring, when they reached him, was frowning. Away
across the room sat Marjory alone.

"Good heavens! he let me alone!" exclaimed Lord Detchmore.

"Perhaps I was your shield," said Adela. "He doesn't like me."

"Nor you, Loring, I expect?"

Presently Lord Detchmore moved away, leaving Adela and Tom together.
They had been together a good deal lately, and their tones showed the
intimacy of friendship.

"That man," said Adela quickly, "suspects something. He's a terrible old
gossip, although he is a great statesman, of course. Can't you prevent
them talking there together?"

"No," said Tom composedly, "I can't; she'd send me away if I went."

"Then I shall go. Why isn't Harry here?"

"He wouldn't come. I've been dining with him at the club."

"He ought to have come."

"I don't believe it would have made any difference."

Adela looked at him for a moment; then she walked swiftly across the
room to Maggie Dennison, and held out her hand.

"Maggie, I haven't had a talk with you for ever so long. How do you do,
Mr. Ruston?"

Ruston shook hands but did not move. He stood silently through two or
three moments of Adela's forced chatter. Mrs. Dennison was sitting on a
small couch, which would just hold two people; but she sat in the middle
of it, and did not offer to make room for Adela. When Adela paused for
want of anything to say, there was silence. She looked from the one to
the other. Ruston smiled the smile that always exasperated her on his
face--the smile of possession she called it in an attempt at definition.

"Look at Marjory!" said Mrs. Dennison. "How solitary she looks! Poor
girl! Do go and talk to her, Adela."

"I came to talk to you," said Adela, in fiery temper.

"Well, I'll come and talk to you both directly," said Maggie.

"We're talking business," added Willie Ruston, still smiling.

"Oh, if you don't want me!" cried Adela, and she turned away, declaring
in her heart that she had made the last effort of friendship.

With her going went Ruston's smile. He bent his head, and said in a low
voice,

"You are the only woman whom I could have left like that, and the only
one whom I could have found it hard to leave. Was it very hard for you?"

"It was just the truth for me," she answered.

"Of course you were angry and hurt. I was afraid you would be," he said.

She looked at him with a curious smile.

"But then," he continued, "you saw how I was placed. Do you think I
didn't suffer in going? I've never had such a wrench in my life. Won't
you forgive me, Maggie?"

"Forgive! What's the use of talking like that? What's the use of my
'forgiving' you for being what you are?"

"You talk as if you'd found me out in something."

She turned to him, saying very low,

"And haven't you found me out, too? We are face to face now, Willie."

He did not fully understand her. Half in justification, half in apology,
he said doggedly,

"I simply had to go."

"Yes, you simply had to go. There was the railway. Oh, what's the use of
talking about it?"

"I was afraid you meant to have nothing more to do with me."

"Or you wished it?" she asked quickly.

He started. She had discerned the thoughts that came into his mind in
his solitary walks.

"Don't be afraid. I've wished it," she added.

There was a pause; then he, not denying her charge, whispered,

"I can't wish it now--not when I'm with you."

"To have nothing more to do with you! Ah, Willie, I have nothing to do
with anything but you."

A swift glance from him told her that her appeal touched him.

"What else is left me? Can I live as I am living?"

"What are we to do?" he asked. "We shall see one another sometimes now.
I can't come to your house, you know. But sometimes----"

"At a party--here and there! And the rest of the time I must live at--at
home! Home!"

He bent to her, whispering,

"We must arrange----"

"No, no," she replied, passionately. "Don't you see?"

"What?" he asked, puzzled.

"Oh, you don't understand! It's not that. It's not that I can't live
without you."

"I never said that," he interposed quickly.

"And yet I suppose it is that. But it's something more. Willie, I can't
live with him."

"Does he suspect?" he asked in an eager whisper.

"I don't know. I really don't know. It's worse if he doesn't. Oh, if you
knew what I feel when he looks at me and asks----"

"Asks what?"

"Nothing--nothing in words; but, Willie, everything, everything. I shall
go mad, if I stay. And then don't you see----?" She stopped, going on
again a moment later. "I've borne it till I could see you. But I can't
go on bearing it."

He glanced at her.

"We can't talk about it here," he said. "Everybody will see how agitated
you are."

For answer she schooled her face to rigidity, and her hands to
motionlessness.

"You must talk about it--here and now," she said. "It's the only time
I've seen you since--Dieppe. What are you going to do, Willie?"

He looked round. Then, with a smile, he offered his arm.

"I must take you to have something," he said. "Come, we must walk
through the room."

She rose and took his arm. Bowing and smiling, she turned to greet her
acquaintances. She stopped to speak to Lord Detchmore, and exchanged a
word with her host.

"Yes. What are you going to do?" she asked again, aloud.

They had reached the room where the _buffet_ stood. Mrs. Dennison, after
a few words to Lady Valentine, who was still there, sat down on a chair
a little remote from the crowd. Ruston brought her a cup of coffee, and
stood in front of her, with the half-conscious intention of shielding
her from notice. She drank the coffee hastily; its heat brought a slight
glow to her face.

"You're going as you planned?" she asked.

He answered in low, dry tones, emptied of all emotion.

"Yes," said he, "I'm going."

She stretched out her hand towards him imploringly.

"Willie, you must take me with you," she said.

He looked down with startled face.

"My God, Maggie!" he exclaimed.

"I can't stay here. I can't stay with him."

Her lips quivered; he took her cup from her (he feared that she would
let it fall), and set it on the table. Behind them he heard merry
voices; Semingham's was loud among them. The voices were coming near
them.

"I must think," he whispered. "We can't talk now. I must see you again."

"Where?" she asked helplessly.

"Carlin's. Come up to-morrow. I can arrange it. For heaven's sake, begin
to talk about something."

She looked up in his face.

"I could stand here and tell it to the room," she said, "sooner than
live as I live now."

He had no time to answer. Semingham's arm was on his shoulder. Lord
Detchmore stood by his side.

"I want," said Semingham, "to introduce Lord Detchmore to you, Mrs.
Dennison. It's not at all disinterested of me. You must persuade
him--you know what about."

"No, no," laughed the Minister, "I mustn't be talked to; it's highly
improper, and I distrust my virtue."

"I'll be bound now that you were talking about Omofaga this very
minute," pursued Semingham.

"Of course we were," said Ruston.

"You're a great enthusiast, Mrs. Dennison," smiled Detchmore. "You ought
to go out, you know. Can't you persuade your husband to lend you to the
expedition?"

Ruston could have killed the man for his _malapropos_ jesting. Maggie
Dennison seemed unable to answer it. Semingham broke in lightly,

"It would be a fine chance for proving the quality--and the equality--of
women," said he. "I always told Mrs. Dennison that she ought to be Queen
of Omofaga."

"And I hope," said Detchmore, with a significant smile, "that there'll
soon be a railway to take you there."

Even at that moment, the light of triumph came suddenly gleaming into
Ruston's eyes. He looked at Detchmore, who laughed and nodded.

"I think so. I think I shall be able to manage it," he said.

"That's an end to all our troubles," said Semingham. "Come, we'll drink
to it."

He signed to a waiter, who brought champagne. Lord Detchmore gallantly
pressed a glass on Mrs. Dennison. She shook her head, but took it.

"Long life to Omofaga, and death to its enemies!" cried Semingham in
burlesque heroics, and, with a laugh--that was, as his laughs so often
were, as much at himself as at the rest of the world--he made a mock
obeisance to Willie Ruston, adding, "_Moriamur pro rege nostro!_" and
draining the glass.

Maggie Dennison's eyes sparkled. Behind the mockery in Semingham's jest,
behind the only half make-believe homage which Detchmore's humorous
glance at Ruston showed, she saw the reality of deference, the
acknowledgment of power in the man she loved. For a brief moment she
tasted the troubled joy which she had paid so high to win. For a moment
her eyes rested on Willie Ruston as a woman's eyes rest on a man who is
the world's as well as hers, but also hers as he is not the world's. She
sipped the champagne, echoing in her low rich voice, so that the men but
just caught the words, "_Moriamur pro rege nostro_" and gave the glass
into Ruston's hand.

A sudden seriousness fell upon them. Detchmore glanced at Semingham, and
thence, curiously, at Willie Ruston, whose face was pale and marked with
a deep-lined frown. Mrs. Dennison had sunk back in her chair, and her
heart rose and fell in agitated breathings. Then Willie Ruston spoke in
cool deliberate tones.

"The King there was a Queen," he said. "You've drunk to the wrong
person, Semingham. I'll drink it right," and, bowing to Maggie Dennison,
he drained his glass. Looking up, he found Detchmore's eyes on him in
overpowering wonder.

"If I tell you a story, Lord Detchmore," said he, "you'll understand,"
and, yielding his place by Maggie Dennison, he took Detchmore with him,
and they walked away in talk.

It was an hour later when Lord Detchmore took leave of his host.

"Well, did you hear the story?" asked Semingham.

"Yes; I heard it," said Detchmore, "about the telegram, wasn't it?"

"Yes, and of course, you see, it explains the toast."

"That sounds like a question, Semingham."

"Oh, no. The note of interrogation was--a printer's error."

"It's a remarkable story."

"It really is," said Semingham.

"And--is it the whole story?"

"Well, isn't it enough to justify the toast?"

"It--and she--are enough," said Detchmore. "But, Semingham----"

Lord Semingham, however, took him by the arm, walked him into the hall,
got his hat and coat for him, helped him on with them, and wished him
good-night. Detchmore submitted without resistance. Just at the last,
however, as he fitted his hat on his head, he said,

"You're unusually explicit, Semingham. He goes to Omofaga soon, don't
he?"

"Yes, thank God," said Semingham, almost cheerfully.




                             CHAPTER XXIII.

                        THE CUTTING OF THE KNOT.


"You can manage it for me?" asked Willie Ruston.

"I suppose I can," answered Carlin; "but it's rather queer, isn't it,
Willie?"

"I don't know whether it's queer or not; but I must talk to her for
half-an-hour."

"Why not at Curzon Street?"

Ruston laughed a short little laugh.

"Do you really want the reason stated?" he inquired.

Carlin shook his head gloomily, but he attempted no remonstrance. He
confined himself to saying,

"I hope the deuce you're not getting yourself into a mess!"

"She'll be here about five. You must be here, you know, and you must
leave me with her. Look here, Carlin, I only want a word with her."

"But my wife----"

"Send your wife somewhere--to the theatre with the children, or
somewhere. Mind you're here to receive her."

He issued his orders and walked away. He hated making arrangements of
this sort, but there was (he told himself) no help for it. Anything was
better than talking to Maggie Dennison before the world in a
drawing-room. And it was for the last time. Removed from her presence,
he felt clear about that. The knot must be cut; the thing must be
finished. His approaching departure made a natural and inevitable end to
it; and her mad suggestion of coming with him shewed in its real
enormity as he mused on it in his solitary thoughts. For a moment she
had carried him away. The picture of her pale eloquent face, and the
gleam of her eager eyes had almost led him to self-betrayal; the idea of
her in such a mood beside him in his work and his triumphs had seemed
for the moment irresistible. She could double his strength and make joy
of his toil. But it could not be so; and for it to be so, if it could
be, he must stand revealed as a traitor to his friend, and be banned for
an outlaw by his acquaintance. He had been a traitor, of course, but he
need not persist. They--she and he--must not stereotype a passing
madness, nor refuse the rescue chance had given them. There was time to
draw back, to set matters right again--at least, to trammel up the
consequence of wrong.

When she came, and Carlin, frowning perplexedly, had, with awkward
excuses, taken himself away, he said all this to her in stumbling
speech. From the exaltation of the evening before they fell pitiably.
They had soared then in vaulting imagination over the bristling
barriers; to-day they could rise to no such height. Reality pressed hard
upon them, crushing their romance into crime, their passion to the
vulgarity of an everyday intrigue. This secret backstairs meeting seemed
to stamp all that passed at it with its own degrading sign; their
high-wrought defiance of the world and the right dwindled before their
eyes to a mean and sly evasiveness. So felt Willie Ruston; and Maggie
Dennison sat silent while he painted for her what he felt. She did not
interrupt him; now and again a shiver or a quick motion shewed that she
heard him. At last he had said his say, and stood, leaning against the
mantelpiece, looking down on her. Then, without glancing up, she asked,

"And what's to become of me, Willie?"

The sudden simple question revealed him to himself. Put in plain
English, his rigmarole meant, "Go your way and I'll go mine." What he
had said might be right--might be best--might be duty--might be
religion--might be anything you would. But a man may forfeit the right
to do right.

"Of you?" he stammered.

"I can't live as I am," she said.

He began to pace up and down the room. She sat almost listlessly in her
chair. There was an air of helplessness about her. But she was slowly
thinking over what he had said and realising its purport.

"You mean we're never to meet again?" she asked.

"Not that!" he cried, with a sudden heat that amazed himself. "Not that,
Maggie. Why that?"

"Why that?" she repeated in wondering tones. "What else do you mean? You
don't mean we should go on like this?"

He did not dare to answer either way. The one was now impossible--had
swiftly, as he looked at her, come to seem impossible; the other was to
treat her as not even he could treat her. She was not of the stuff to
live a life like that.

There was silence while he waged with himself that strange preposterous
struggle, where evil seemed good, and good a treachery not to be
committed; wherein his brain seemed to invite to meanness, and his
passion, for once, to point the better way.

"I wish to God we had never----" he began; but her despairing eyes
stifled the feeble useless sentence on his lips.

At last he came near to her; the lines were deep on his forehead, and
his mouth quivered under a forced smile. He laid his hand on her
shoulder. She looked up questioningly.

"You know what you're asking?" he said.

She nodded her head.

"Then so be it," said he; and he went again and leant against the
mantelpiece.

He felt that he had paid a debt with his life, but knew not whether the
payment were too high.

It seemed to him long before she spoke--long enough for him to repeat
again to himself what he had done--how that he, of all men, had made a
burden that would break his shoulders, and had fettered his limbs for
all his life's race--yet to be glad, too, that he had not shrunk from
carrying what he had made, and had escaped coupling the craven with his
other part.

"What do you mean?" she asked at last; and there was surprise in her
tone.

"It shall be as you wish," he answered. "We'll go through with it
together."

Though he was giving what she asked, she seemed hardly to understand.

"I can't let you go," he said; "and I suppose you can't let me go."

"But--but what'll happen?"

"God knows," said he. "We shall be a long way off, anyhow."

"In Omofaga, Willie?"

"Yes."

After a pause she rose and moved a step towards him.

"Why are you doing it?" she asked, searching his eyes with hers. "Is it
just because I ask? Because you're sorry for me?"

She was standing near him, and he looked on her face. Then he sprang
forward, catching her hands.

"It's because you're more to me than I ever thought any woman could be."

She let her hands lie in his.

"But you came here," she said, "meaning to send me away."

"I was a fool," he said, grimly, between his teeth.

She drew her hands away, and then whispered,

"And, Willie--Harry?"

Again he had nothing to answer. She stood looking at him with a wistful
longing for a word of comfort. He gave none. She passed her hand across
her eyes, and burst into sudden sobs.

"How miserable I am!" she sobbed. "I wish I was dead!"

He made as though to take her hand again, but she shrank, and he fell
back. With one hand over her eyes, she felt her way back to her chair.

For five minutes or more she sat crying. Ruston did not move. He had
nothing wherewith to console her, and he dared not touch her. Then she
looked up.

"If I were dead?" she said.

"Hush! hush! You'd break my heart," he answered in low tones.

In the midst of her weeping, for an instant she smiled.

"Ah, Willie, Willie!" she said; and he knew that she read him through
and through, so that he was ashamed to protest again.

She did not believe in that from him.

Presently her sobs ceased, and she crushed her handkerchief into a ball
in her hand.

"Well, Maggie?" said he in hard even tones.

She rose again to her feet and came to him.

"Kiss me, Willie," she said; "I'm going back home."

He took her in his arms and kissed her. She released herself, and gazed
long in his face.

"Why?" he asked. "You can't bear it; you know you can't. Come with me,
Maggie. I don't understand you."

"No; I don't understand myself. I came here meaning to go with you. I
came here thinking I could never bear to go back. Ah, you don't know
what it is to live there now. But I must go back. Ah, how I hate it!"

She laid her hand on his arm.

"Think--if I came with you! Think, Willie!"

"Yes," he said, as though it had been wrung from him, "I know. But come
all the same, Maggie," and with a sudden gust of passion he began to
beseech her, declaring that he could not live without her.

"No, no," she cried; "it's not true, Willie, or you're not the man I
loved. Go on, dear; go on. I shall hear about you. I shall watch you."

"But you'll be here--with him," he muttered in grim anger.

"Ah, Willie, are you still--still jealous? Even now?"

A silence fell between them.

"You shall come," he said at last. "What do I care for him or the rest
of them? I care for nothing but you."

"I will not come, Willie. I dare not come. Willie, in a week--in a
day--Willie, my dear, in an hour you will be glad that I would not
come."

As she spoke, her voice grew louder. The words sounded like a sentence
on him.

"Is that why?" he asked, regarding her with moody eyes.

She hesitated before she answered, in bewildered despair.

"Yes. I don't know. In part it is. And I daren't think of Harry. Let me
think, Willie, that it's a little bit because of Harry and the children.
I know I can't expect you to believe it, but it is a little, though it's
more because of you."

"Of me?--for my sake, do you mean?"

"No; not altogether for your sake; because of you."

"And, Maggie, if he suspects?"

"He won't suspect," she said. "He would take my word against the world."

"They suspect--some of them--that woman Mrs. Cormack. And--does
Marjory?"

"It is nothing. He won't believe. Marjory will not say a word."

"You'll persuade him that there was nothing----?"

"Yes; I'll persuade him," she answered.

She began to pull a glove on to her hand.

"I must go," she said. "It's nearly an hour since I came."

He took a step towards her.

"You won't come, Maggie?" he urged, and there was still eagerness in his
voice.

"Not again, Willie. I can't stand it again. Good-bye. I've given you
everything, Willie. And you'll think of me now and then?"

He was unmanned. He could not answer her, but turned towards the wall
and covered his face with his hand.

"I shan't think of you like that," she said, a note of wondering
reproach in her voice. "I shall think of you conquering. I like the hard
look that they blame you for. Well, you'll have it soon again, Willie."

She moved towards the door. He did not turn. She waited an instant
looking at him. A smile was on her lips, and a tear trickled down her
cheeks.

"It's like shutting the door on life, Willie," she said.

He sprang forward, but she raised her hand to stay him.

"No. It is--settled," said she; and she opened the door of the room and
walked out into the little entrance-hall.

It was a wet evening, and the rain pattered on the roof of the
projecting porch. They stood there a moment, till her cabman, who had
taken refuge in the lee of the garden wall, brought his vehicle up to
the door. They heard a step creak behind them in the hall, and then
recede. Carlin was treading on tip-toe away.

Maggie Dennison put out her hand and met Ruston's. She pressed his hand
with strength more than her own, and she said, very low,

"I am dying now--this way--for my king, Willie," and she stepped out
into the rain, and climbed into the cab.

"Back to where you brought me from," she called to the man, and leaning
forward, where the cab lamps caught her face, so that it gleamed like
the face of some marble statue, she looked on Willie Ruston. Her lips
moved, but he heard no word. The wheels turned and the lamps flashed,
and she was carried away.

Willie started forward a step or two, then ran to the gate and, leaning
on it, watched the red lights as they fled away; and long after they
were gone, he stood there, bareheaded, in the drenching rain. He did not
think; he still saw her, still heard her voice, and watched her broad
low brow. She still stood before him, not the fairest of women, but the
woman who was for him. And the rumble of retreating wheels sounded again
in his ears. She was gone.

How long he stood he did not know. Presently he felt an arm passed
through his, and he was led back to the house.

Old Carlin took him through the hall into his own little study, where a
bright fire blazed, and gave him brandy, which he drank, and helped him
off with his wet coat, and put a cricketing jacket on him, and pushed
him into an arm-chair, and hunted for a pair of slippers for him.

All this while neither spoke; and at last Carlin, his tasks done, stood
and warmed himself at the fire, looking steadily in front of him, and
never at his friend.

"You dear old fool," said Willie Ruston.

"Ah, well, well, you mustn't take cold. If you were laid up now, what
the deuce would become of Omofaga?"

His small, sharp, shrewd eyes blinked as he spoke, and he glanced at
Willie Ruston as he named Omofaga.

Willie sprang to his feet with an oath.

"My God!" he cried, "why do you do this for me? Who'll do anything for
her?"

Carlin blinked again, keeping his gaze aloof. Then he held out his hand,
and Willie seized it, saying,

"I'm--I'm precious hard hit, old man."

The other nodded and, as Willie sank back in his chair, stole quietly
out of the room, shutting the door close behind him.

Willie Ruston drew his chair nearer the fire, and spread out his hands
to the blaze. And as the heat warmed his frame, the stupor of his mind
passed, and he saw some of what was true--a glimpse of his naked self
thrown up against the light of the love that others found for him. And
he turned away his eyes, for it seemed to him that he could not look
long and endure to live. And he groaned that he had won love and made
for himself so mighty an accuser of debts that it lay not in him to pay.
For even then, while he cursed himself, and cursed the nature that would
not be changed in him; even while the words of his love were in his
ears, and her presence near with him; even while life seemed naught for
the emptiness her going made, and himself nothing but longing for her;
even then, behind regret, behind remorse, behind agony, behind
self-contempt and self-disgust, lay hidden, and deeper hidden as he
thrust it down, the knowledge that he was glad--glad that his life was
his own again, to lead and make and shape; wherein to take and hold, to
play and win, to fasten on what was his, and to beat down his enemies
before his face. That no man could rob him of, and the woman who could
would not. So, as Maggie Dennison had said, in the passing of an hour he
was glad; and in the passing of a week he had learnt to look in the face
of the gladness which he had and loathed.




                             CHAPTER XXIV.

                        THE RETURN OF A FRIEND.


About a week later, Tom Loring sat at work in his rooms. The table was
strewn with books of blue and of less alarming colours. Tom was smoking
a short pipe, and when he paused for a fresh idea, the smoke welled out
of his mouth, aye, and out of his nose, thick and fast. For a while he
wrote busily; then a dash of his pen proclaimed a finished task, and he
lay back in the luxury of accomplishment. Presently he pushed back his
chair, knocked out his pipe, refilled it, and stretched himself on the
sofa. After the day's work came the day's dream; and the day's dream
dwelt on the coming of the evening hour, when Tom was to take tea with
Adela Ferrars at half-past five. When he had an appointment like that,
it coloured his whole day, and made his hard labour pass lightly. Also
it helped him to forget what there was in his own life and his friends'
to trouble him; and he nursed with quiet patience a love that did not
expect, that hardly hoped for, any issue. As he had been content to be
Harry Dennison's secretary, so he seemed satisfied to be an undeclared
lover; finding enough for his modesty in what most men would have felt
only a spur to urge them to press further.

He was roused by a step on the stair. A moment later, Harry Dennison
burst into the room. Tom had seen him a few days before, uneasy,
troubled, apologetic, talking of Maggie's strange indisposition--she was
terribly out of sorts, he had said, and appeared to find all company and
all talk irksome. He had spoken with a meek compassion that exasperated
Tom--an unconsciousness of any hardship laid on him. Tom sat up, glad to
console him for an hour; glad, perhaps, of any company that would trick
an hour into the past. But to-day Harry's step was light; there was a
smile on his lips, a gleam of hope in his eyes; he rushed to Tom, seized
his hand, and, before he sat down or took off his hat, blurted out,

"Tom, old boy, she wants you to come back."

Tom started.

"What?" he cried, "Mrs. Dennison wants----"

"Yes," Harry went on, "she sent for me to-day, and told me that she saw
how I missed you, and that she was sorry that she had--well--sorry for
all the trouble, you know. Then she said, 'I wonder if Tom (she called
you Tom) bears malice. Tell him Omofaga is quite gone, and I want him to
come back, and if he'll come here, I'll go on my knees to him.'"

Harry stopped, smiling joyfully at his wonderful news. Tom wore a
doubtful look.

"I can't tell you," said Harry, "what it means to me. It's not only your
coming, old chap, though, heaven knows, I'm gladder of that than I've
been of anything for months--but you see what it means, Tom? It
means--why, it means that we're to be as we were before that fellow
came. Tom, she spoke to me more as she used to-day."

His voice faltered; he spoke as an innocent loyal man might of a pardon
from some loved capricious Sovereign. He had not understood the
disfavour--he had dimly discerned inexplicable anger. Now it was past,
and the sun shone again. Tom found himself saying,

"I wish there were more fellows in the world like you, Harry."

Harry's eyes opened in momentary astonishment at the irrelevance, but he
was too full of his news and his request to stay for wonder.

"You'll come, Tom?" he asked. "You won't refuse her?" "Could anyone
refuse her anything?" was what his tone said. "We want you, Tom," he
went on. "Hang it, I've had no one to speak to lately but that Cormack
woman. I hate that woman. She's always hinting something--some lie or
other, you know."

"Don't be too hard on little Mrs. Cormack," said Tom.

He remembered certain words which had shown a soft spot in Mrs.
Cormack's heart. Harry did not know that she had grieved to hear him
pacing up and down.

"You'll come, Tom? I know, of course, that you've a right to be angry,
and to say you won't, and all that. But I know you won't do it. She's
not well, Tom; and I--I can't always understand her. You used to
understand her, Tom. She used to like your chaff, you know."

Tom would not enter on that. He pressed Harry's hand, answering,

"Of course, I'll come."

"Bring all this with you," cried Harry. "I shan't take up your time. You
must stick to your own work as much as you like. When'll you come, Tom?"

"Why, to-morrow," said Tom Loring.

"Not now?"

"I might, if you like," smiled Tom.

"That's right, old chap. You can send round for your things. Bring a
bag, and come to-night. Your room's there for you. I told them to keep
it ready. Damn it, Tom, I thought things would come straight some day,
and I kept it ready."

Had things come straight? Tom did not know.

"I say," pursued Harry, "I met Ruston to-day. He was very kind about my
cutting the Omofaga. I wonder if I've been unjust to him!"

Then Tom smiled.

"I shouldn't bother about that, if I were you," said he.

"Well, he's not a thin-skinned chap, is he?" asked Harry, with relief.

"I should fancy not," said Tom.

"You see, he's off in a fortnight, and I thought we ought to part
friends. So I told him--well, I said, you know, that when he came back,
we should be glad to see him."

Tom began to laugh.

"You're getting quite a diplomatist, Harry," he said.

When Harry bustled away, his high spirits raised higher still by Tom's
ready assent, Tom put on the garb of society, and took a cab to Adela
Ferrars'.

"She'll be very pleased about this," thought Tom, as he went along.
"It's good news to take her."

But whatever else Tom Loring knew, it is certain that he was not
infallible on the subject of women and their feelings. He recognised the
fact (having indeed suspected it many times before) when Adela, on the
telling of his tidings, flashed out in petulance,

"She's sent for you back?" she asked; and Tom nodded.

"And you're going?" was the next quick question.

"Well, I could hardly refuse, could I?"

"No; I suppose not--at least not if you're Maggie Dennison's dog, for
her to drive away with a stick and whistle back at her pleasure."

Tom had been drinking tea. He set down the cup, and feebly stroked his
thigh with his hand; and he glanced at Adela (who was rattling the tea
things) with deprecatory surprise.

"I hadn't thought of it like that," he ventured to remark.

"Oh, of course, you hadn't. Maggie sends you away--you go. Maggie sends
a footman (well, then, Harry) for you--and back you go. And I suppose
you'll say you're very sorry, won't you? and you'll promise you won't do
it again, won't you?"

"I don't think I shall be asked to do that," said Tom, speaking
seriously, but showing a slight offence in his manner.

"But if she tells you to?" asked Adela scornfully.

"I didn't think you'd take it like this. Why shouldn't I go back?"

"Oh, go back! Go back and fetch and carry for Maggie, and write Harry's
speeches till the end of the chapter. Oh, yes, go back."

Tom was puzzled.

"Has anything upset you to-day?" he asked.

"Has anything upset me!" echoed Adela, throwing her eyes up to the
ceiling.

Tom finished his tea in a nervous gulp.

"I don't see why I shouldn't go back," he said.

"Well, I'm telling you to go back," said Adela. "Go back till she's had
enough of you again--and then be turned out again."

Tom's face grew crimson.

"At least," he said slowly, "she has never spoken to me like that."

Adela had left the table and taken an arm-chair near the fire. Her back
was to the door and her face towards Tom; she held a fire-screen between
her and him, letting the blaze burn her face. But Tom, being
unobservant, paid no attention to the position of the fire-screen. With
a look of pain on his face, he took up his hat and rose to his feet. The
meeting had been very different from what he had hoped.

"When do you go?" she asked brusquely.

"To-night. I'm just going back to my rooms for a bag, and then I shall
go. I'm sorry you should--I'm sorry you don't think I'm doing right."

"It doesn't matter two straws what I think," said Adela behind the
screen.

"Aye, but it does to me," said Tom.

She made no answer, and he stood for a moment, looking uneasily at the
intruding fire-screen.

"Well, good-bye," he said.

"Good-bye."

"I shall see you soon, I hope."

"If Maggie will let you come."

"I don't know," said Tom, "what pleasure you find in that. It seems to
me that as a gentleman--to say nothing of my being their friend--I must
go back."

She made no retort to this, and he moved a step towards the door. Then
he turned and glanced at her. She had dropped the screen and her eyes
were fixed on the fire. He sighed, frowned, shrugged his shoulders,
turned, and made for the door again. In another second he would have
been gone, but Adela cried softly,

"Mr. Loring."

"Yes," he answered, coming to a halt.

"Stay where you are a minute. Will you stay there a minute?"

"An hour if you like," said Tom.

"I just want to say that--that--You're coming nearer!--I want you to
stay just where you are."

Tom halted. He had, in fact, been coming slowly towards her.

"I suppose," said Adela, in quite an indifferent tone, "that you'll
settle down with the Dennisons again?"

"I don't know. Yes; I suppose so."

"Do you," said Adela, sinking far into the recesses of the arm-chair,
and holding up the screen again, "like being there better than anywhere
else? I suppose Maggie is very charming?"

"You know just what she is."

"I'm sure I don't. I'm a woman."

There was a long pause. Tom felt absurd, standing there in the middle of
the room. Suddenly Adela leapt to her feet.

"Oh, go away! Yes, you're right to go back. Oh, yes, you're quite right.
Good-bye, Mr. Loring."

For a moment longer Tom stood still; then he moved, not towards the
door, but towards Adela. When he spoke to her it was in a husky voice.
There were no sweet seducing tones in his voice.

"There's only one place in the world I really care to be," he said.

She did not speak.

"Harry and Mrs. Dennison are my friends," he said, "and as long as my
time's my own, I'll give it to them. But you don't suppose I go there
for happiness?"

"I don't suppose you ever did anything for happiness," said Adela, as
though she were advancing a heinous charge. "Really, nothing makes me so
impatient as an unselfish man."

Tom smiled, but his smile was still a nervous one. Nevertheless he felt
less absurd. A distant presage of triumph stole into his mind.

"Don't you want me to go?" he asked.

"You may go wherever you like," said she.

Tom came still nearer. Adela held out her hand and said "good-bye." Tom
took the hand and held it.

"You see," he said, "I didn't think I had anywhere else to go. I did
know a charming lady who was very witty and--very rich----!"

"I--I'll put some more in Omofaga and lose it. Oh, you are stupid, Tom!
I really thought I should have to ask you myself, Tom. I'd have done it
sooner than let you go."

It was not, happily, in the end necessary, and Adela said with a sigh,

"I believe that I've something to thank Mr. Ruston for, after all."

"What's that?"

"Why, he made me resolved to marry the man who of all the world was most
unlike him."

"Then I've something to thank him for too."

"Tom," she said, "I don't know what I said to you. I--I was jealous of
Maggie Dennison."

It was later by an hour when Tom Loring took his way, not to his rooms
for a bag, but straight to Curzon Street. Adela had consented not to
wait ("In one's eleventh season one does not want to wait," she said),
and Tom considered that it was now hardly worth while to move. So he
broke into Harry Dennison's study with a radiant face, crying,

"Harry, I'm not coming to you after all, old fellow."

Harry started up in dismay, but a short explanation turned his sorrow
into rejoicing. Again and again he shook Tom's hand, telling him that
the man who won a good wife won the greatest treasure earth could
offer--and (he added) "by Jove, Tom, I believe the best chance of heaven
too," and Tom gripped Harry's hand and cleared his own throat. Then they
both felt very much ashamed, and, by way of forgetting this deplorable
outburst of emotion (which Tom felt was quite un-English, and smacked
indeed of Mrs. Cormack), agreed to go upstairs and announce the news to
Maggie.

"She'll be delighted," said Harry.

Tom followed him upstairs to the drawing-room. Mrs. Dennison was sitting
by the fire, doing nothing. But she sprang up when they came in, and
advanced to meet Tom. He also felt like an ill-used subject as she gave
him her hand and said,

"How forgiving you are, Tom!"

He looked in her face, and found her smiling under sad eyes. And he
muttered some confused words about "all that" not mattering "tuppence."
And indeed Mrs. Dennison seemed content to take the same view, for she
smiled again and said,

"Ah, well, there's an end of it, anyhow."

Then Harry, who had been wondering why Tom delayed his tidings, burst
out with them, and Tom added lamely,

"Yes, it's true, Mrs. Dennison. So you see I can't come."

She laughed.

"I must accept your excuse," she said, and added a few kind words. "As
for Adela," she went on, "she's never been to see me lately, but for
your sake I'll be humble and go and see her to-morrow."

Harry, as though suddenly remembering, exclaimed that he must tell the
children; in fact, he had an idea that a man liked to talk about his
engagement to a woman alone, and plumed himself on getting out of the
room with some dexterity. So Tom and Maggie Dennison were left for a
little while together.

At first they talked of Adela, but it was on Tom's mind to say something
else, and at last he contrived to give it utterance.

"I can't tell you," he said, looking away from her, "how glad I was to
get your message. This--this trouble--has been horrible. I know I
behaved like a sulky fool. I was quite wrong. It's awfully good of you
to forget it."

"Don't talk like that," she said in a low, slow voice. "How do you think
Harry's looking?"

"Oh, better than I have seen him for a long time. But you're not looking
very blooming, Mrs. Dennison."

She leant forward.

"Do you think he's happy, or is he worrying? He talks to you, you know."

"I think he's happier than he's been for months."

She lay back with a sigh.

"I hope so," she said.

"And you?" he asked, timidly yet urgently.

It seemed useless to pretend complete ignorance, yet impossible to
assert any knowledge.

"Oh, why talk about me? Talk about Adela."

"I love Adela," he said gravely, "as I've never loved any other woman.
But when I was a young man and came here, you were very kind to me. And
I--no, I'll go on now--I looked up to you, and thought you the--the
grandest woman I knew; and to us young men you were a sort of queen.
Well, I haven't changed, Mrs. Dennison. I still think all that, and, if
you ever want a friend to help you, or--or a servant to serve you, why,
you can call on me."

She sat silent while he spoke, gazing at the ground in front of her. Tom
grew bolder.

"There was one thing I came to Dieppe to do, but I hadn't the courage
there. I wanted to tell you that Harry--that Harry was worthy of your
love. I thought--well, I've gone further than I thought I could. You
know; you must forgive me. If there's one thing in all the world that
makes me feel all I ever felt for you, and more, it's to see him happy
again, and you here trying to make him. Because I know that, in a way,
it's difficult."

"Do you know?" she asked.

"Yes, I know. And, because I know, I tell you that you're a wife any man
might thank God for."

Mrs. Dennison laughed; and Tom started at the jarring sound. Yet it was
not a sound of mirth.

"You had temptations most of us haven't--yes, and a nature most of us
haven't. And here you are. So,"--he rose from his chair and took her
hand that drooped beside her, and bent his head and kissed it--"though I
love Adela with all my heart, still I kiss your hand as your true and
grateful servant, as I used to be in old days."

Tom stopped; he had said his say, and his voice had grown tremulous in
the saying. Yet he had done it; he had told her what he felt; and he
prayed that it might comfort her in the trouble that had lined her
forehead and made her eyes sad.

Mrs. Dennison did not glance at him. For a moment she sat quite silent.
Then she said,

"Thanks, Tom," and pressed his hand.

Then she suddenly sat up in her chair and held her hand out before her,
and whispered to him words that he hardly heard.

"If you knew," she said, "you wouldn't kiss it; you'd spit on it."

Tom stood, silently, suddenly, wretchedly conscious that he did not know
what he ought to do. Then he blurted out,

"You'll stay with him?"

"Yes, I shall stay with him," she said, glancing up; and Tom seemed to
see in her eyes the picture of the long future that her words meant. And
he went away with his joy eclipsed.




                              CHAPTER XXV.

                            THE MOVING CAR.


In the month of June two years later, Lord Semingham sat on the terrace
outside the drawing-room windows of his country house. By him sat Adela
Loring, and Tom was to be seen a hundred yards away, smoking a pipe, and
talking to Harry Dennison. Suddenly Semingham, who had been reading the
newspaper, broke into a laugh.

"Listen to this," said he. "It is true that the vote for the Omofaga
railway was carried, but a majority of ten is not a glorious victory,
and there can be little doubt that the prestige of the Government will
suffer considerably by such a narrow escape from defeat, and by Lord
Detchmore's ill-advised championship of Mr. Ruston's speculative
schemes. Why is the British Government to pull the chestnuts out of the
fire for Mr. Ruston? That is what we ask."

Lord Semingham paused and added,

"They may well ask. I don't know. Do you?"

"Yesterday," observed Adela, "I received a communication from you in
your official capacity. It was not a pleasant letter, Lord Semingham."

"I daresay not, madam," said Semingham.

"You told me that the Board regretted to say that, owing to unforeseen
hindrances, the work in Omofaga had not advanced as rapidly as had been
hoped, and that for the present it was considered advisable to devote
all profits to the development of the Company's territory. You added
however, that you had the utmost confidence in Mr. Ruston's zeal and
ability, and in the ultimate success of the Company."

"Yes; that was the circular," said Semingham. "That is, in fact, for
some time likely to be the circular."

They both laughed; then both grew grave, and sat silent side by side.

The drawing-room window was thrown open, and Lady Semingham looked out.
She held a letter in her hand.

"Oh, fancy, Adela!" she cried. "Such a terrible thing has happened. I've
had a letter from Marjory Valentine--she's in awful grief, poor child."

"Why, what about?" cried Adela.

"Poor young Walter Valentine has died of fever in Omofaga. He caught it
at Fort Imperial, and he was dead in a week. Poor Lady Valentine! Isn't
it sad?"

Adela and Semingham looked at one another. A moment ago they had jested
on the sacrifices demanded by Omofaga; Semingham had seen in the
division on the vote for the railway a delightful extravagant burlesque
on a larger stage of the fatefulness which he had whimsically read into
Willie Ruston's darling scheme. Adela had fallen into his mood, adducing
the circular as her evidence. They were taken at their word in grim
earnest. Omofaga claimed real tears, as though in conscious malice it
had set itself to outplay them at their sport.

"You don't say anything, Alfred," complained little Lady Semingham from
the window.

"What is there to say?" asked he, spreading out his hands.

"The only son of his mother, and she is a widow," whispered Adela,
gazing away over the sunny meadows.

Bessie Semingham looked at the pair for an instant, vaguely dissatisfied
with their want of demonstrativeness. There seemed, as Alfred said, very
little to say; it was so sad that there ought to have been more to say.
But she could think of nothing herself, so, in her pretty little lisp,
she repeated,

"How sad for poor Lady Valentine!" and slowly shut the window.

"He was a bright boy, with the makings of a man in him," said Semingham.

Adela nodded, and for a long while neither spoke again. Then Semingham,
with the air of a man who seeks relief from sad thoughts which cannot
alter sadder facts, asked,

"Where are the Dennisons?"

"She went for a walk by herself, but I think she's come back and gone a
stroll with Tom and Harry." As she spoke, she looked up and caught a
puzzled look in Semingham's eye. "Yes," she went on in quick
understanding. "I don't quite understand her either."

"But what do you think?" he asked, in his insatiable curiosity that no
other feeling could altogether master.

"I don't want to think about it," said Adela. "But, yes, I'll tell you,
if you like. She isn't happy."

"No. I could tell you that," said he.

"But Harry is happy. Lord Semingham, when I see her with him--her
sweetness and kindness to him--I wonder."

This time it was Semingham who nodded silent assent.

"And," said Adela, with a glance of what seemed like defiance, "I pray."

"You're a good woman, Adela," said he.

"He sees no change in her, or he sees a change that makes him love her
more. Surely, surely, some day, Lord Semingham----?"

She broke off, leaving her hope unexpressed, but a faint smile on her
face told of it.

"It may be--some day," he said, as though he hardly hoped. Then, with
one of his quick retreats, he took refuge in asking, "Are you happy with
your husband, Adela? I hope to goodness you are."

"Perfectly," she answered, with a bright passing smile.

"But you get no dividends," he suggested, raising his brows.

"No; no dividends," said she. "No more do you."

"No; but we shall."

"I suppose we shall."

"He'll pull us through."

"I wish he'd never been born," cried Adela.

"Perhaps. Since he has, I shall keep my eye on him."

From the shrubbery at the side of the lawn, Maggie Dennison came out.
She was leaning on her husband's arm, and Tom Loring walked with them. A
minute later they had heard from Adela the news of the ending of young
Sir Walter's life and hopes.

"Good God!" cried Harry Dennison in grief.

They sat down and began to talk sadly of the lost boy. Only Maggie
Dennison said nothing. Her eyes were fixed on the sky, and she seemed
hardly to hear. Yet Adela, stealing a glance at her, saw her clenched
hand quiver.

"Do you remember," asked Semingham, "how at Dieppe Bessie would have it
that the little red crosses were tombstones? She was quite pleased with
the idea."

"Yes; and how horrified the old Baron was," said Adela.

"Both he and Walter gone!" mused Harry Dennison.

"Well, the omen is fulfilled now," said Tom Loring. "Ruston need not
fear for himself."

Harry Dennison turned a sudden uneasy glance upon his wife. She looked
up and met it with a calm sad smile.

"He was a brave boy," she said. "Mr. Ruston will be very sorry." She
rose and laid her hand on her husband's arm. "Come, Harry," she said,
"we'll walk again."

He rose and gave her his arm. She paused, glancing from one to the other
of the group.

"You mustn't think he won't be sorry," she said pleadingly.

Then she pressed her husband's arm and walked away with him. They passed
again into the fringing shrubbery and were lost to view. Tom Loring did
not go with them this time, but sat down by his wife's side. For a while
no one spoke. Then Adela said softly,

"She knows him better than we do. I suppose he will be sorry. Will he be
sorry for Marjory too?"

"If he thinks of her," said Semingham.

"Yes--if he thinks of her."

Semingham lit a cigarette and watched the smoke curl skywards.

"Some of us are bruised," said he, "and some of us are broken."

"Not beyond cure?" Adela beseeched, touching his arm.

"God knows," said he with a shrug.

"Not beyond cure?" she said again, insisting.

"I hope not, my dear," said Tom Loring gently.

"Bruised or broken--bruised or broken!" mused Semingham, watching his
smoke-rings. "But the car moves on, eh, Adela?"

"Yes, the car moves on," said she.

"And I don't know," said Tom Loring, "that I'd care to be the god who
sits in it."

                                   * * * * *

While Maggie Dennison walked with Harry in the shrubbery, and the group
on the terrace talked of the god in the car, on the other side of the
world a man sat looking out of a window under a new-risen sun. Presently
his eyes dropped, and they fell on a wooden cross that stood below the
window. A cheap wreath of artificial flowers decked it--a wreath one of
Ruston's company had carried over seas from the grave of his dead wife,
and had brought out of his treasures to honour young Sir Walter's grave;
because he and they all had loved the boy. And, as Maggie Dennison had
said, Ruston also was sorry. His eyes dwelt on the cross, while he
seemed to hear again Walter's merry laugh and confident ringing tones,
and to see his brave, lithe figure as he sprang on his horse and
cantered ahead of the party, eager for the road, or the sport, aye, or
the fight. For a moment Willie Ruston's head fell, then he got up--the
cross had sent his thoughts back to the far-off land he had left. He
walked across the little square room to an iron-bound box; unlocking it,
he searched amid a pile of papers and found a woman's letter. He began
to read it, but, when he had read but half, he laid it gently down again
among the papers and closed and locked the box. His face was white and
set, his eyes gleamed as if in anger. Suddenly he muttered to himself,

"I loved that boy. I never thought of it killing him."

And on thought of the boy came another, and for an instant the stern
mouth quivered, and he half-turned towards the box again. Then he jerked
his head, muttering again; yet his face was softer, till a heavy frown
grew upon it, and he pressed his hand for the shortest moment to his
eyes.

It was over--over, though it was to come again. Treading heavily on the
floor--there was no lightness left in his step--he reached the door, and
found a dozen mounted men waiting for him, and a horse held for him. He
looked round on the men; they were fine fellows, tall and stalwart,
ready for anything. Slowly a smile broke on his face, an unmirthful
smile, that lasted but till he had said,

"Well, boys, we must teach these fellows a little lesson to-day."

His followers laughed and joked, but none joined him where he rode at
their head. The chief was a man to follow, not to ride with, they said,
half in liking, half in dislike, wholly in trust and deference. Yet in
old days he had been good to ride with too.

The car was moving on. Maybe Tom Loring was not very wrong, when he said
that he would not care to be the man who sat in it.


                                THE END.


BOOKS BY LINA BEARD AND ADELIA B. BEARD

          _Illustrated by the Authors_

          ON THE TRAIL

          THINGS WORTH DOING AND HOW TO DO THEM

          RECREATIONS FOR GIRLS--INDOOR AND OUTDOOR

          WHAT A GIRL CAN MAKE AND DO, AND NEW IDEAS FOR WORK AND PLAY

          THE AMERICAN GIRL'S HANDY BOOK; or, HOW TO AMUSE YOURSELF
            AND OTHERS

          LITTLE FOLKS' HANDY BOOK

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS




Little Folks' Handy Book

By

LINA BEARD AND ADELIA B. BEARD

With Many Illustrations

by the Authors

          Charles Scribner's Sons
          NEW YORK  CHICAGO   BOSTON

          COPYRIGHT, 1910, BY
          CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS

Printed in the United States of America

J


SPECIAL NOTICE

All the material in this book, both text and cuts, is original with the
authors and invented by them; and warning is hereby given that the
unauthorized printing of any portion of the text and the reproduction of
any of the illustrations or diagrams are expressly forbidden.


[Illustration]




PREFACE


"LET _me_ do it. Let _me_ make it," is the cry when a child sees an
older person putting together the different parts of an interesting
piece of work; and it is this desire to do things himself, this impulse
toward self-expression, that, when properly directed, forms so great a
factor in his all-around development and education. Using the hands and
brain together stimulates interest and quickens observation and
intelligence, and, as the object takes form beneath the little fingers,
the act of making, of creating, brings with it a delight and
satisfaction which the mere possession of the same thing made by another
can not give. "Look! See what _I_ have made," comes with a ring of
triumph as the childish hands gleefully hold up the finished article for
inspection.

In this book we have endeavored to open a new and large field of simple
handicrafts for little folk, giving them an original line of toys and a
new line of materials with which to make them. We hope in these pages to
bring to children the joy of making creditable and instructive toys of
such ordinary things as empty spools, sticks of kindling wood, wooden
clothespins, natural twigs, old envelopes and newspapers, and in this
way to encourage resourcefulness, originality, inventiveness, and the
power to do with supplies at hand.

Everything described in the book has been actually made by the authors,
and made by such practical and simple methods that a child's mind can
grasp them, and a child's hands be easily trained to manufacture the
articles. It is, therefore, our hope that the "Little Folks' Handy Book"
will be found useful both in Kindergarten and Primary grades of the
schools and in the home nursery; a helpful friend to teachers and to
mothers.

          LINA BEARD.
          ADELIA B. BEARD.

          FLUSHING, N. Y., _February 10, 1910._




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                  PAGE

     I. PAPER BUILDING CARDS                                 1

    II. TOYS MADE OF COMMON WOODEN BERRY-BASKETS             5

   III. STRAW AND PAPER FURNITURE                            9

    IV. A NEWSPAPER BOAT WHICH WILL SAIL ON REAL WATER      15

     V. PAPER JEWELRY                                       19

    VI. WHAT TO MAKE OF EMPTY SPOOLS                        28

   VII. OLD ENVELOPE TOYS AND HOW TO MAKE THEM              47

  VIII. TOYS OF CLOTHESPINS                                 55

    IX. SCRAP-BOOKS                                         64

    X. TOYS MADE OF COMMON KINDLING WOOD                    70

    XI. LITTLE TWIG PEOPLE                                  79

   XII. VISITING-CARD HOUSES                                90

  XIII. PLAYING INDIANS WITH COSTUMES MADE OF NEWSPAPERS    98

   XIV. CHRISTMAS-TREE DECORATIONS                         106

    XV. A HOME-MADE SANTA CLAUS                            124

   XVI. NATURE STUDY WITH TISSUE-PAPER                     130




LITTLE FOLKS' HANDY BOOK




CHAPTER I

PAPER BUILDING CARDS


MAKE your building cards of ordinary writing-paper. You may have as many
cards as you like, though twelve are all that are used to make the
things shown in our photographs.

[Illustration: FIG. 1--Cut an oblong out like this.]

[Illustration: FIG. 2--This is the building card.]

For each card cut an oblong of paper five inches long and two and a half
inches wide. This is a very good size, but you can make them a little
larger or smaller. Always remember, however, to have them just twice as
long as they are wide, and all of one size. When you have cut out the
oblong (Fig. 1) fold it through the middle, bringing the two short edges
evenly together. The dotted line in Fig. 1 shows where it is to be
folded. Now open the oblong half-way and you will have the building card
(Fig. 2). They are very simple and easy to make, aren't they? But
wonderful and delightful things can be built with these pieces of
paper. You can have a whole camp of little tents by standing the cards
with the folded edge up; and to make


=A Camp Chair=

all you need do is to push two of your tents close together, then on top
of their folded edges lay another card with one flat side down to form
the seat and the other side up for the back.

[Illustration: FIG. 3--You can make a little camp chair.]

The second illustration (Fig. 3) shows just how to do this. Use the
tents again for


=The Pyramid=

in Fig. 4. Stand three tents in a row close together. On top of these
make a floor by laying two cards across with one side of each card
extending down at the back of the tents. Then build a second story--two
tents this time, with a floor on top.

[Illustration: FIG. 4--Use the tents to make this pyramid.]

The third and top story will be one tent, which forms the peak of the
pyramid. Of course you can make your pyramid very much larger by adding
more tents to the first row and then building it up higher.


=The Stable=

is very cunning with its four little stalls. To build it you must stand
the cards on their side edges as in Fig. 2. One side forms the back wall
of the stall, the other the side wall. When you have reached the end of
the row you will find the last stall lacks a side wall, but all you have
to do is to slide another back wall behind the last and there you have
the needed side wall. Put a roof over the stalls just as you made the
floors for your pyramid, and then stand a tent on top for the cupola.
Place a card at each end of the stalls, as shown in the illustration,
and your stable is ready for its tiny horses.

[Illustration: FIG. 5--A little stable with four little stalls.]

Build


=The Garden Wall=

(Fig. 6) by standing the cards on their side edges. You can make the
garden any size or shape you like, but always have the gateway just
wide enough to hold the tent roof on top. See how the cards stand with
edges in on either side of the opening. This will support the
tent-shaped roof. Perhaps the children will want a house in the garden.
You can build one if you try. Then see how many more things can be made
of the paper cards, for I have not told you half of them.

[Illustration: FIG. 6--A garden wall and gateway.]




CHAPTER II

TOYS MADE OF COMMON WOODEN BERRY-BASKETS


USE a one-quart wooden berry-box for the china closet (Fig. 7). Turn the
empty box facing you, and slide the prongs of a clothespin up through
the open crack at the lower right hand of the box. Allow one prong of
the clothespin to come on the outside and the other prong on the inside
of the thin wooden side of the box; adjust the clothespin well to the
front edge of the box, and it will form the right-hand front leg of the
china closet. Add another leg in like manner on the same side of the box
for the back leg; then slide two more clothespins up on the opposite
side of the box to form the remaining two legs (Fig. 8).

[Illustration: FIG. 7--The berry-basket china closet.]

[Illustration: FIG. 8--Slide clothespins on the basket for legs.]

The prongs of the clothespins do not reach up to the top of the inside
of the box, but leave sufficient space for a shelf. Make the shelf by
laying a clothespin across from side to side, supported by the prongs of
the back legs, and another across, supported by the prongs of the front
legs (Fig. 8). The clothespin used for the front of the shelf will
probably have to be a trifle longer than that for the back, as the box
is wider in front than at the back. Set some toy dishes on the top, the
shelf, and the inside bottom of the china closet, as in Fig. 7.

With another quart berry-box and four more clothespins make the


=Doll's Table=

Slide the prongs of a clothespin down on either side of the box at the
four corners (Fig. 9), then turn the table right side up, placing it on
its feet. Set the table with toy dishes, and dinner will be ready (Fig.
10).

[Illustration: FIG. 9--Slide the prongs of the clothespins down on the
sides of the box.]

[Illustration: FIG. 10--Make the doll's table.]

The table can be turned into a dressing-case by standing two clothespins
on their heads at each side of the back of the top of the table, and
sliding a piece of stiff paper across from clothespin to clothespin
between the prongs for a mirror (Fig. 11). Of course, the addition of a
fringed white paper, or cloth scarf, over the top of the dressing-case
would enhance its appearance, as would also a table-cloth over the top
of the dinner table, but the covers were purposely omitted in the
photographs that one may see exactly how the articles were made.

[Illustration: FIG. 11--The table can be turned into a dressing-case.]

Make a


=Dolly's Bassinet=

(Fig. 12) of a small oblong berry-basket with four clothespin legs
slanting outward at the bottom and the prongs of the legs on each side
brought together at the top (Fig. 13). On the centre of one end of the
basket slide down the prongs of a fifth clothespin to form the upright
for holding drapery (Fig. 13). When adjusted, fold a lady's handkerchief
diagonally through the centre and hang it over the support, as in Fig.
12. The bassinet will then be ready for a folded handkerchief as bedding
and a little baby doll.

[Illustration: FIG. 12--A perfect little bassinet.]

[Illustration: FIG. 13--The bassinet without the drapery.]

A comical little berry-basket


="Bow-wow"=

(Fig. 14) can be made by using a two-quart basket for the body, the
bassinet basket for a head, and clothespins for ears, tail, and legs.
Fasten the legs on the body so that the front legs will slant forward
and the back legs backward, that the dog may appear to be running (Fig.
15); slide a clothespin on the end of the basket for a tail; then fasten
two clothespins slanting backward on the small basket for ears; set the
small basket on the front end of the large one, placing it so that
almost half of it projects over the large basket, and the comical little
dog will be finished.

[Illustration: FIG. 14--A comical berry-basket "bow-wow".]

[Illustration: FIG. 15--Put the legs on slantingly.]

Fig. 16 shows two clothespin horses attached to a


=Berry-basket Wagon=

with clothespin wheels. The driver is a clothespin held up by a
clothespin seat, and the wagon is filled with clothespin people along
each side edge.

[Illustration: FIG. 16--The berry-basket wagon with clothespin horses.]




CHAPTER III

STRAW AND PAPER FURNITURE


A HANDFUL of straws, such as are used for lemonade and soda-water,
several large sheets of writing-paper, and some small-sized pins--these
are your materials. A pair of sharp scissors, a ruler marked off into
whole, half, and quarter inches, and a lead pencil--these are your
tools.

[Illustration: FIG. 17--The old-fashioned bedstead.]

We will begin with the old-fashioned four-post bedstead with its canopy
and valances (Fig. 17). It is easily put together, but you must be
careful to cut the straws for the posts all exactly the same length,
making them about seven inches long, and to have your measurements for
the other parts quite correct, in order that the bedstead may stand
perfectly upright. Select four straight straws for the posts--sound and
whole. Split straws will not do.

The mattress and canopy are exactly alike; each has its valance, and
they are just the same size; so directions for one will answer for both.
Cut an oblong of writing-paper eight and a half inches long and six and
a half inches wide. Be sure that the ends and side edges form perfect
right angles; if they do not, the bed will be crooked. The edges of your
sheet of writing-paper are at right angles to one another, and if you
use the top edge of your paper for the top edge of your oblong, and the
side edge of the paper for one side edge of your oblong, the rest will
come out all right.

[Illustration: FIG. 18--The mattress and canopy.]

Now draw perfectly straight lines across your oblong from top to bottom,
just one and a half inches from each edge (Fig. 18). Then from side to
side draw two more straight lines; the first one and a half inches below
the top edge and the other one and a half inches above the bottom edge.
This gives the mattress with a border all around. In each corner of the
mattress, a little more than a quarter of an inch from the end and side
lines, draw a small cross as shown in Fig. 18. Be sure these crosses are
placed correctly, and are exactly alike in mattress and canopy. Now cut
out the four squares at the corners of the oblong, as indicated by the
heavy lines in Fig. 18, and insert the point of your scissors in the
centre of each little cross and snip along each line of the cross. Do
not make the slashes too deep.

Cut the edges of the border, or valance, into small points, as in Fig.
17; then bend the valance down at the sides and ends of the mattress.
The dotted lines in the diagrams show where to bend the paper. Make the
canopy just as you have made the mattress, but cut deeper points on the
edge of the valance.

Through each of the four straw bedposts run a small pin two and a
quarter inches from the end of the straw (Fig. 19).

[Illustration: FIG. 19--Slide the paper down to the pin.]

Push the long ends of the straws up through the slashed crosses in the
corners of the mattress (Fig. 19) until the bottom of the mattress rests
on the pins, then run a pin through each straw just above and close to
the top of the mattress. Between the two pins the paper can slip neither
up nor down. Run another pin in each straw post half an inch from the
top, slide the canopy down upon these, and fasten with more pins, as you
did the mattress. Make the bolster by folding a piece of paper the
proper shape and cutting the end edges in points for trimming.

Now you not only know how to make the bedstead, but


=The Little Table=

as well, for if you will look at Fig. 20 you will see that it is put
together in the same manner as the bedstead.

[Illustration: FIG. 20--The little table.]

Make the legs of the table three inches long. Cut the top of the table
four inches long and three and a half inches wide, and the shelf three
and a half inches long and three inches wide. Measure one-quarter of an
inch from each edge of the table top and draw straight lines as in Fig.
21. This will give you a narrow border all around the top.

Make and cut the little crosses in the corners of top and shelf, then
cut out the squares at the corners of the top and bend down the edges.
The shelf of the table should be one inch above the bottom ends of the
straws, and the top of the table one-quarter of an inch below the top
ends of the straws.

[Illustration: FIG. 21--A narrow border all around the table top.]

By making the straw legs of the table twice as long, and the top and
shelves narrower, you can have another useful article of furniture, for
by adding two shelves of paper on the straws, and fastening them in the
same way, this can be used as a cupboard or shelves on which to place
the tiny doll dishes or clothes. The table can also be made into a
little dressing-table, by simply using for the back legs straws twice as
long as the front legs and then slipping a square piece of paper on the
straws that extend above the table, to serve as a mirror. Just as the
paper is slipped on the straws for the back of the chair (Fig. 22),
silver paper is pasted on this to make it look like glass.

With these few patterns you can make any number of useful articles to
furnish Miss Dolly's house. You can make small beds and large beds,
small tables and large tables, and many sizes of chairs.

You can make


=The Chair=

by merely looking at Fig. 22 and the diagrams, Figs. 23 and 24. No pins
were used in this, but if you want the chair to last it is best to
fasten it securely like the rest of the furniture. The straws for the
back should be six inches long and for the front legs two and a quarter
inches long. The shelf under the chair is the size of the seat.

[Illustration: FIG. 22--The high-backed chair.]

This furniture will be especially useful in playing with paper dolls,
and by using different colors, in colored papers, you can have a blue
room, a pink room, and a green room.

[Illustration: FIG. 23--Push the straw through the back of the chair.]

You can make tissue-paper sheets and spread for the bed and
pillow-slips, too, if you like. Thus dolly can be tucked away snugly for
the night.

The ingenuity exercised in the construction of these simple articles
will encourage the development of deftness and skill in the little
fingers, which are ever ready to imitate anything that teacher can make.

[Illustration: FIG. 24--Cut the back and seat like these.]




CHAPTER IV

A NEWSPAPER BOAT WHICH WILL SAIL ON REAL WATER


[Illustration: FIG. 25--The newspaper boat made water-proof and sailing
on real water.]

YOU can fold a thirteen-and-a-half-inch square of newspaper into a fine
boat measuring thirteen inches from stem to stern. It will be a good,
stanch craft like Fig. 25, to float and sail out in the open on pond,
lake, or river, or at home in basin or bath tub.

[Illustration: FIG. 26--Square of newspaper for making boat.]

[Illustration: FIG. 27--Paper folded at centre.]

[Illustration: FIG. 28--Paper with sides bent down, making four layers.]

[Illustration: FIG. 29--Paper ready to turn back lower corners.]

[Illustration: FIG. 30--Ready for folding back the upper corners.]

Cut your square of paper even and straight. Place it out flat on top of
a bare table and fold at the centre along the dotted line (Fig. 26),
which will make Fig. 27. Bend each side of this down outwardly along its
centre at the dotted line and bring the edges a quarter of an inch lower
than the bottom fold A; then your paper will be four layers like Fig.
28. Turn up the lower edge B of Fig. 28, making Fig. 29. Fold back the
three lower layers of the corners at the dotted lines (Fig. 29) and you
will have Fig. 30. Bend back the upper corners at the dotted lines to
make Fig. 31. Open Fig. 31 at the top and it will be your boat. Turn the
boat upside down and slide one loose edge on the bottom under the other
loose edge; then pinch each bottom point and bend it down toward the
centre of the boat, creasing it flat (Fig. 32). Turn the boat right side
up again, set it on the table, bend the two sides well up and crease
them along the bottom until the boat resembles Fig. 33.

[Illustration: FIG. 31--Square folded into boat.]

[Illustration: FIG. 32--Fold points on bottom of boat inward toward
centre--this way.]

[Illustration: FIG. 33--Newspaper boat without sail.]

To render the craft water-proof melt a piece of wax candle, turn the
boat upside down again and give the bottom a coat of the melted white
wax, extending the coat half way or more up the sides. Use a teaspoon
for pouring the wax over the boat; the hot wax soon hardens and in a
few moments you may launch the little craft on the water.

If you want to make a


=Sailing Vessel=

of your boat, roll up a one-inch-wide strip of newspaper into an
old-fashioned paper lighter, which is merely rolling the strip spirally
into a round stick; this is the mast. Cut a paper sail, not too large,
puncture holes in it and slide the sail on the mast; add a small paper
pennant on the extreme top; then insert the base of the mast into a
common wooden spool and glue the spool tight to the bottom of the boat
at the centre of the bow.

With thread and needle take a stitch or two in the lower corner of the
sail and attach it with a short length of the thread to the stern;
fasten securely. Also fasten the pennant to the mast, so that it cannot
turn, for in this vessel both sail and pennant must be stationary and
not swing to either side. Be careful not to have the sail too heavy.




CHAPTER V

PAPER JEWELRY


ORDINARY brown wrapping paper is the best to use for this paper jewelry.
Indeed the pale, creamy yellow of some wrapping paper is much like ivory
in color, and the chains and ornaments made of it are really charming.


=The Necklace=

See how simply the necklace is made without glue or paste. It is a
system of double rings that shift and slide in one's hands like the
links of a metal chain. When the principle is understood it is all very
easy.

The rings may be cut out free-hand by folding the paper as in Fig. 34.
Cut an oblong about six inches long and three inches wide and fold it
crosswise through the middle, then bring the two side edges together and
fold it again lengthwise. Start at the top where the paper is folded and
cut out the ring as in Fig. 34. You will notice in the drawing that the
circle at the top is slightly elongated; this is necessary in fitting
the rings together. The ring when opened will look like Fig. 35. Cut out
six rings the size and shape of Fig. 35, then make two smaller ones,
like A (Fig. 36), and eight still smaller ones, like B (Fig. 36). Now
cut a single ring perfectly round, a trifle larger than Fig. 34, a
double ring like C (Fig. 37), and a pearl-shaped pendant like Fig. 38.
Open Fig. 38 and cut the three-cornered catch in one half and the slit
in the other half, as shown in Fig. 39. Cut the catch first, then fold
the pendant again, as in Fig. 38, and punch small holes with a pin at
the base of the catch through the other half, to mark the place for the
slit. The slit must not be as long as the base of the catch, else the
catch will not hold.

[Illustration: The little queen. Adorned with paper jewelry.]

Put the necklace together by slipping the half of one ring over both
halves of another, as in Fig. 40. Commence with the single ring. Slip
half of a large double ring through the single ring, bring the double
ring together and slip another large ring through that, then add another
large ring and you will have a chain of three large rings with the
single ring at the end.

[Illustration: FIG. 34--Fold and cut like this.]

[Illustration: FIG. 35--When the ring is opened.]

[Illustration: FIG. 36--Make smaller rings like these.]

[Illustration: FIG. 37--Fasten the pendant on the ring.]

[Illustration: FIG. 38--The pendant.]

[Illustration: FIG. 39--The pendant open.]

[Illustration: FIG. 40--Slip the half of one ring over both halves of
another.]

[Illustration: FIG. 41--Cut a clasp like this.]

[Illustration: FIG. 42--Fasten the clasp in this way.]

To the end double ring attach a ring, like A (Fig. 36); to A add a chain
of four rings like B (Fig. 36). This gives you just half of the
necklace, for the single ring is to be the middle one. Make the other
half in the same way, starting on the opposite side of the single ring
and slipping ring into ring as you did before. Attach the ring pendant,
C (Fig. 37), to the single ring between the two side rings, then add the
pendant. Fasten the two halves of the pendant together by folding the
two points of the catch inward, slipping the catch through the slit and
then spreading the points out again flat. This makes a very secure
fastening and, unless the neck of the catch is too slender, it will
neither break nor pull apart.

[Illustration: FIG. 43--The finished jewelry.]

Fig. 41 is the clasp for the necklace. Cut it out like the pattern and
make it about three inches long. Slip one end of the clasp through the
last ring on one end of the necklace, the other end of the clasp through
the last ring on the other end of the necklace, then bring the clasp
together and slip the catch through the slit, as in Fig. 42. The
photograph (Fig. 43) shows how pretty the necklace is when finished.


=The Coronet=

The coronet shown in the illustration of the "Little queen" is cut in
one piece (Fig. 44). At the widest part, from top to bottom, it is three
inches wide, and the ends may be lengthened or shortened to fit any
head. The ends must meet and fasten at the back.

Little rings, one inch in diameter, cut like Fig. 45, ornament the
coronet, as shown in Fig. 44. They are fastened by the catch at the top
through slits cut in the coronet. Make three slits, one below the other,
a little over one inch apart, down the middle of the coronet, and on
either side of these make six more slits in the position shown on the
right half of Fig. 44. This gives fifteen slits, for which you must have
fifteen rings. These dangling little rings that shake and twinkle with
every movement are fascinating little ornaments, and are far prettier
than more elaborate designs.


=Ear-rings=

Quite oriental-looking ear-rings are made like Fig. 46. Cut first two
single elongated hoops like Fig. 47, making them almost three inches
long and one and three-quarter inches from side to side. These long
hoops are to slip over the ears to hold the ear-rings on. Cut two hoops,
like D (Fig. 46), and two pendants, like E (Fig. 46). Fasten the hoop D
upon the hoop (Fig. 46), and the pendant E upon the hoop D, clasping the
pendant by its catch as you did the pendant of the necklace. The
children need not follow exactly the shapes of the "danglers" and
pendants shown here--let them exercise their own taste in these.

[Illustration: FIG. 44--The coronet is cut in one piece.]

[Illustration: FIG. 45--Little rings ornament the coronet.]

[Illustration: FIG. 46--Oriental-looking ear-rings.]

[Illustration: FIG. 47--Cut two hoops like this.]

[Illustration: FIG. 48--The bangle bracelet.]

[Illustration: FIG. 49--Cut a strip for the bangle bracelet.]

[Illustration: FIG. 50--Cut six round charms.]

[Illustration: FIG. 51--A link bracelet.]

[Illustration: FIG. 52--Slip one link through another.]


=The Bangle Bracelet=

The bangle bracelet (Fig. 48) is made as in Fig. 49. Cut a strip of
paper half an inch wide and about eight inches long; make a catch at
one end and a slit in the other end, then a little below the middle cut
six slits half an inch apart, as in Fig. 49.

[Illustration: Playing lady. The lorgnette.]

Cut six round charms, three-quarters of an inch in diameter, with a
catch at the top like Fig. 50, and fasten the charms on the bracelet.
Fig. 49 gives the inside of the bracelet with three charms attached.
This bracelet is large for a small child, but can be shortened at the
end to fit any little arm.


=A Link Bracelet=

Fig. 51 is a link bracelet. Make this by folding a strip of paper eight
inches long crosswise through the middle. Bring the folded end half way
down and fold, turn back the other end and fold like a fan. This
divides the paper into six equal parts. Now cut out the outer edge of
all the links at once. Free the two end links and cut out the centres of
the others, then cut the centres of the two links, as shown in Fig. 51,
making the catch and slit like the pattern.

[Illustration: FIG. 53--Make the lorgnette case of a strip of paper.]

[Illustration: FIG. 54.]

[Illustration: FIG. 55--The glasses swing loosely.]

The links of the long chain shown in the photograph of "The queen and
her captive," are cut exactly like the bangle bracelet (Fig. 49). The
slits and charms are, of course, omitted. Fig. 52 shows how the chain is
put together by slipping one link through another and fastening it with
its catch. You can make the chain any length. It is so strong that only
rough handling will pull it apart.


=The Lorgnette=

Now comes the lorgnette, which works beautifully made of rather stiff
paper. Make the case of a strip of paper three inches wide and eight
inches long. Fold the paper lengthwise through the middle and cut it,
rounding at the top like Fig. 53. In one side cut a small round hole at
the top, rather near the edge of the case, F (Fig. 53), and fold back
the lower corners according to the dotted lines. Cut out the eyeglasses
like Fig. 54. Curl the edges of the ball G together and slide the ball
through the hole F in the case, as in Fig. 55.

[Illustration: The queen and her captive.]

The glasses swing quite loosely by this hinge, and will slide easily in
and out of the case. When tucked away inside the case a little flirt of
the hand, a turn of the wrist, will throw them out and they can be
lifted to a piquant little nose in the most approved and fine-ladylike
fashion.

The lorgnette in use is shown in the photograph, "Playing lady." "The
little queen" displays jewelry, and "The queen and her captive" show the
long chain.




CHAPTER VI

WHAT TO MAKE OF EMPTY SPOOLS


GATHER up all the spools you can find, big, little, thick, and thin; no
matter how many, you can use them all. There is no end of fun to be had
with these always-on-hand, easily found toys; they may be made into
almost everything.


=Spool Houses=

are very simply constructed. Begin building by standing ten spools in a
straight row for the front of the house. Make one side with seven spools
placed at right angles with the front. This gives you one corner of the
house. Build the back parallel to the front by standing nine spools at
right angles with the side. You will then have two corners of the house
and three sides. Add a row of six spools along the empty space between
the front and back of the house for the fourth side, as in Fig. 56.
Remove the third and fourth spools from the left-hand corner of the
front of the house to form the doorway, and examine the foundation--see
that it is even and straight before erecting the walls; then continue
the building, placing a spool on top of each foundation spool (Fig. 57).
Build on another layer of spools, except over the second and third
spools at the right hand of the doorway opening (Fig. 58). Add another
row of spools (Fig. 59), and another (Fig. 60). Lay a piece of
pasteboard box over the top of the walls (Fig. 61), and make the roof of
a piece of almost any kind of paper by bending and creasing the paper
down along the lengthwise centre and up along the lengthwise edges.
Place the roof on top of the pasteboard ceiling (Fig. 62). Do not have
the roof project over the end of the house where you are to build the
chimney, for the chimney must be quite close to the house. Select large
spools for the chimney and build it by standing one spool on top of
another until the chimney extends above the roof. You can top the
chimney by laying a piece of cardboard over the last spool and placing
two small spools on it side by side. Enclose the yard with a spool
fence; standing the spools a short distance from each other, as in the
photograph. Use spools of larger size for the gateway, topping them with
two smaller ones (Fig. 62).

[Illustration: FIG. 56--First row of spools.]

[Illustration: FIG. 57--Second row of spools.]

[Illustration: FIG. 58--Third row of spools.]

[Illustration: FIG. 59--Fourth row of spools.]

[Illustration: FIG. 60--Fifth row of spools.]

[Illustration: FIG. 61--A piece of pasteboard on top.]

[Illustration: FIG. 62--Place the roof on top.]

[Illustration: FIG. 63--Trees and flowers made of paper and spools.]

Make the yard into a cheerful


=Sunshiny Garden=

(Fig. 63), with flowers and trees of paper and tubs and flower-pots of
spools, where the clothespin people may go for recreation.

The trees are easy to make and are very effective; they are simply
fringed strips of paper rolled like a paper lighter with the large ends
stuck into spools. Cut a strip of green tissue-paper fifteen inches long
and five wide; then cut one-third of the strip narrow, about one inch
wide, and fringe the remaining two thirds (Fig. 64). With the thumb and
first finger of your right hand begin to roll the corner as shown at A
(Fig. 64). Continue rolling, and the fringe, which forms the foliage,
will stand out on the outside of the rolled part or trunk of the tree.
When you reach the solid, narrow part of the paper strip it will roll
into a smooth, round stick, forming the lower part of the tree trunk.
Paste the last wrapped corner of the paper roll in place and clip the
tree trunk off even across the bottom edge; then press it into a hole in
the centre of an empty spool of ordinary size, and there's your tree!
You can vary the foliage by crimping the fringe with knife or scissors
before the strip is rolled into a tree and by having the fringe of some
much longer than that of others. If you use different tones, tints, and
shades of green, running from very light to dark, and make a lot of them
varying in height, the trees will look very pretty and they can form a
jungle where toy wild animals can live; or a number of the trees might
form a playground or a grove where dolls may go for a picnic.

[Illustration: FIG. 64--This is the way to make a tree.]

In the photograph of the group of trees you will see a number of pots of
flowers. The flowers are disks and squares of different bright-colored
tissue-paper, each one with its centre pinched together and twisted into
a stemlike piece, which is pushed down into a buttonhole-twist spool.
Around some of the flowers a smaller square of green may be used for
foliage.

You could make an extensive flower garden by using a great number of
these short, flat spools and bits of gay tissue-paper, and they can be
arranged and rearranged in many different ways.

It is possible to make all kinds of toy furniture of spools. If you want


=A Bedroom Set,=

use four spools for the legs of a bedstead, place them in position and
lay a piece of stiff white paper, bent up at one end, on top of the
spools. The bed will then be ready for the doll (Fig. 65).

[Illustration: FIG. 65--A little bedstead.]

[Illustration: FIG. 66--A table can be made in a moment's time.]

[Illustration: FIG. 67--The lamp.]

A little table can be made in a moment's time. All that is necessary is
to choose a large spool and place a round piece of paper on the top
(Fig. 66). Make the bureau of six spools close together in two rows of
three spools each, and cut the top of a piece of paper with a high
extension in the centre, which you must bend upright for a mirror. The
washstand can be four spools quite close together covered with a piece
of paper. A piano is easily made, but you must think it out for
yourself. Use a small spool for the piano-stool.


=The Lamp=

(Fig. 67) is a spool with a little roll of white paper shoved into the
hole and a circular piece of paper crimped around the edge for the
shade. Unless you need the spool to use again in other ways, you might
paste the paper on and make a lamp which will not come apart.

You can glue the tops on the table and washstand and the mirror on the
bureau also; though this is not necessary, for if you are careful and do
not knock against the furniture it will remain secure.

Now make the toy


=Kitchen=

with empty spools, and the entire kitchen will not cost one cent of
money.

[Illustration: FIG. 68--Just like a kitchen.]

[Illustration: FIG. 69--The stove without the stovepipe.]

[Illustration: FIG. 70--The finished stove.]

See how firm and substantial the little kitchen furniture looks in the
photograph with its fine stove, dresser, and wash-tub (Fig. 68). Use
four spools for the feet of the stove. Over these lay a piece of
pasteboard about six inches long and four inches wide, allowing it to
project beyond the front feet to form the apron; then build on the body
of the stove, making it of spools two layers deep, as in Fig. 69. Cut a
piece of pasteboard to fit over the spools for the stove top, and have
it long enough to stand out a short distance at the back; then you can
build on the stovepipe (Fig. 70).

[Illustration: FIG. 71--The kitchen dresser.]

Make the dresser of spools and strips cut from pasteboard boxes (Fig.
71).

[Illustration: FIG. 72--The dining table.]

For the tubs stand four spools close together, and set a little round
box on top of them. Make the washboard of a piece of paper folded many
times backward and forward, fan fashion. After carefully creasing the
folds, pull the paper out slightly and put it in the tub for the next
washday (Fig. 68).

After cooking,


=A Dining Table=

will be needed. With eight spools and a piece of pasteboard cut from a
box you can make a fine dining table; the legs of the table are four
columns of two spools each, as you see in Fig. 72, and the chairs are
made of spools with bent pieces of cardboard pasted on top. The
decorations of the table are small spools with bright tissue-paper for
flowers arranged at the four corners of the table, and the plates are
the round pasteboard tops from milk bottles.

When enough furniture has been manufactured, build


=A Wagon=

[Illustration: FIG. 73--Pattern of little wagon.]

[Illustration: FIG. 74--The wagon of cardboard with spool for wheels.]

Cut Fig. 73 from heavy paper or cardboard that will fold without
breaking. Bend all the dotted lines and cut all the heavy lines in the
pattern. Push a burnt match, or a wooden toothpick through one hub, then
through an empty spool and the second hub. The spool forms the wheels.
Screw a small pin cautiously through each of the two projecting ends of
the match, piercing the wood and leaving the head and point of the pin
standing out (Fig. 74). Tie a knot in the end of a string to prevent its
sliding out and thread it through the hole in the dashboard.

[Illustration: FIG. 75--A Sunday-school room made of spools.]

By laying narrow strips of paper on a table or on the floor to form a
boundary line, you may make a


=Sunday-School Room=

Leave an open space for the doorway at the opposite end of the room from
the organ. Build up a column of four large spools at each side of the
space and connect them with a strip of paper laid from the top of one
column to the top of the other.

Build the fine, large pipe-organ close to the edge of the back room.
Stand eight spools in a row tight to each other at equal distances from
each boundary side line. Build the row up three spools high, then
skipping the end spools, build on two layers of six spools each; again
skip the end spools and build on a layer of four spools. Crown the last
layer with two top spools. Across the centre front of the organ stand a
row of spools, two high and three long. Over them lay a piece of paper
bent lengthwise through the centre for the key-board and music-rack.
Bend another piece of paper for the music and stand it on the key-board
against the rack. Make the organ seat of two spools placed side by side
in front of the organ with a strip of paper laid over them. Let the
seats for the doll children be rows of three spools each. Place the
seats one in front of another in parallel lines a short distance apart
and allow a wide, lengthwise central aisle between them. All this is
shown in Fig. 75.

[Illustration: FIG. 76--The spool trolley car.]


=Trolley Car=

Hunt up an old pasteboard box, for you will need a box lid about fifteen
inches long and eight inches wide as a foundation for the realistic
trolley car (Fig. 76). Use eight spools for the wheels; place two spool
wheels near the front and two near the back on each side. Lay the spools
down flat and rest the edge of the box lid on the body of the spools;
then stand a row of eleven spools on each side of the top of the box
lid. Beginning at one end of the row, build up every other spool into
three-spool columns; the intervening spaces form the open windows of the
car.

Leave windows on the opposite side of the car in the same way, and place
a row of spools close up against the bottom spools of each side of the
car to form the car seats. Roof the car with a piece of cardboard cut
off square at one end and rounded at the other. On top of each side of
this roof place one row of six buttonhole-twist spools, the spools of
each row separated equal distances (Fig. 76). Stand a spool on the front
of the car platform for the motorman's wheel and you have a car like
that in the photograph.

When the trolley is taken apart use the spools in building


=A Bridge=

Fig. 77 shows that the piers can be built to a good height and be solid
and substantial.

Stand three large-sized spools together, forming a triangle, with one
point turned to face the opposite pier. This group of three spools is
the foundation of one of the two columns, which together form one pier
of the bridge.

About two inches distant and on a line with the triangle of spools stand
a group of three more spools, and build up each group into a column four
spools high. You will need two more columns for the opposite pier of the
bridge; build them as you did the first, and place the second pier
exactly opposite to and as far from the first as you desire the span
should reach--say about fourteen inches.

Lay a strip of pasteboard six inches wide across from pier to pier,
allowing the ends to rest on the piers, but not extend beyond the
outside end edges of the piers; then if your span is fourteen, inches
long, cut from a pasteboard box two more strips fourteen inches long and
of the same width as the span; score each strip across one end, one inch
from the edge, bend slightly and fit the bent edge of each strip on one
end of the bridge, allowing the other end of the strip to extend away
from the pier and rest on the floor, forming an inclined approach to the
bridge proper as in Fig. 77.

[Illustration: FIG. 77--The spool bridge.]

When your pasteboard strips are well settled in place, continue building
up the piers on top of the pasteboard, making each group of three spools
two layers high; then build up one spool two layers high on top of the
four columns.

[Illustration: FIG. 78--Span the two columns with this.]

Complete the archway by spanning the two columns of each pier with a
narrow strip of stiff white paper bent up into a point at the centre and
out into a flap at each end (Fig. 78). The flaps rest on top of the
spools. The photograph shows how the entire bridge should look, and in
the photograph you will find a little lady hurrying across the bridge on
her way home, and following in her wake Mr. Clothespin and Mrs.
Clothespin. A paper boat under the bridge would make the scene more
realistic.

Next build


=A Memorial Arch=

(Fig. 79), something like the one which was erected in New York City.
Commence with two groups of spools a short distance apart; have three in
each group, two in the back and one in the front. Build up columns four
spools high; then lay a strip of pasteboard across from one to the
other. On top of the pasteboard place two more groups of smaller spools
a little nearer together than the first groups. Make these columns two
spools high and crown each with a single spool decorated with a
bright-colored paper flag fastened on a stick pushed down into the
spool. At the base of the arch add three more spools on each side, _o_
and _o_ (Fig. 79), and the structure will be completed. This is not
exactly like the original, but for a spool arch it is fine, and a spool
procession will feel honored to march through it.

[Illustration: FIG. 79--A spool memorial arch.]


=The Parthenon=

[Illustration: FIG. 80--The Parthenon made of spools.]

If you have enough spools, you can make a miniature representation of
one of the most beautiful temples ever built. Begin by standing four
spools in a row for the first end of the building, allowing about the
width of a spool between each two. Place eight in a row for the first
side, four for the other end, and eight for the second side (Fig. 80).
Have the spools all of the same size, that the walls may be alike and
perfectly even, because, as you know, the walls are to be formed of
columns, not as many as in the original, but enough to give an idea of
the Greek temple. Build up the spools three deep into pillars; then lay
a piece of pasteboard on the top of the columns for a ceiling. Bend
another piece of pasteboard lengthwise through the centre for the roof,
and stand it tent-like on top of the ceiling. You can measure the
correct size of the ceiling by laying a piece of pasteboard down flat on
the floor along the eight-columned side of the Parthenon to obtain the
length, and placing it flat on the floor across the four-columned side
to mark the width. Make the roof the same length and a little wider than
the ceiling, to allow for the height of the bend through the centre.

[Illustration: FIG. 81--You can blow bubbles with a spool.]

You must imagine a space immediately beneath the roof of the little
Greek temple filled in with the most beautiful statuary, and think of
the spools as white marble columns, and you should see, in fancy,
another row of stately columns inside the ones you have built. Tell all
about the real Parthenon and hunt up a picture of the temple that all
may see just how near you came to making the little model look like the
wonderful Parthenon on the Acropolis, in Athens.

After admiring the building for a while, pretend that a left-over spool


=Is a Venetian Shell=

shot from a cannon, and toss it gently against the roof at one end of
the temple, then see the columns totter and fall, leaving only a portion
of the Parthenon standing, in the same way that the real marble columns
fell when the original structure was shattered and practically destroyed
by the soldiers.

You can


=Blow Bubbles with a Spool,=

beautiful bubbles, which float and glide in the air with all the charm
of clay-pipe bubbles. Mix strong soap-suds, dip one end of a large spool
in the water, wet the spool, then blow. If the bubble refuses to appear,
dip the spool in the water again, put your head down to the spool and
blow a few bubbles while the spool is in the water, then quickly raise
it and try again. Nine times out of ten you will succeed, and a bubble
will swell out from the spool as in Fig. 81. These wooden bubble-blowers
last a long time, with no danger of breaking when accidentally dropped
on the floor, and you can always find enough to provide one for each of
the players who meet for a trial of skill in bubble-blowing.

Now try


=Pretty Butterflies=

which fly from spools. Cut a butterfly (Fig. 82) from bright-colored
tissue paper or thin writing paper, bend at the dotted line and paste on
the large end of a very small cork. Fit the small end of the cork into
the top of the hole of an empty spool (Fig. 83). Then blow through the
spool and see the butterfly ascend rapidly to the ceiling and float down
again. A number of different colored butterflies in the air at one time
fill the room with charming bits of fluttering brightness that will
delight the children.

[Illustration: FIG. 82--Pattern of butterfly.]

[Illustration: FIG. 83--It will fly from the spool.]

Take another empty spool and stick a common wire hairpin partially into
the hole, bend the hairpin slightly down against the edges of the hole,
do the same with three more hairpins, and you will have a spool with a
funnel-like opening of hairpins at the top (Fig. 84). In the funnel
place a small, light-weight ball made of a crushed bit of bright paper
wound around with thread. Raise the spool to your lips and blow gently
(Fig. 85). The ball will rise and fall in mid-air, in the same way that
you have seen one of rubber dance at the top of a small fountain or jet
of water.

[Illustration: FIG. 84--The ball is placed on top of the spool.]

[Illustration: FIG. 85--The ball will rise and fall.]




CHAPTER VII

OLD ENVELOPE TOYS, AND HOW TO MAKE THEM


DON'T throw away your old envelopes; see what amusing toys can be made
of them simply by folding and cutting. No paste or glue is needed, and
any one of the toys given here can be made in five minutes or less.

[Illustration: FIG. 86--The side view of the frog shows his beautiful
open mouth.]

[Illustration: FIG. 87--The frog is sprawled out on the table.]


=The Frog=

The frog is one of the simplest and at the same time the funniest of the
collection. Fig. 86 gives a side view in which his beautiful open mouth
can be seen to advantage. Fig. 87 shows him sprawled out on the table.
Fig. 88 gives the pattern of the frog as it appears when drawn on the
envelope. You will notice that the bottom fold of the envelope is used
for the top of the animal. Draw the outlines as in Fig. 88, then cut
along the lines you have drawn. The under part of the body follows the
edge of the lower lap of the envelope from front to hind leg. Now
flatten out the fold at the top and bend the paper under at the
corners, which forms the head and tail. Cut a slit along the folded
edge of the head for the mouth, pull the lower part down and the mouth
will open wide as a frog's mouth naturally does. By working the lower
jaw the frog can be made to snap at imaginary flies. Draw the eyes as
shown in Fig. 87 and bend down the lower part of the body along the
dotted line, shown in Fig. 88, spread out the hind legs, and Master Frog
is finished.

[Illustration: FIG. 88--The pattern of the frog drawn on an envelope.]


=The Little Bed=

[Illustration: FIG. 89--Use a long envelope for the little bed.]

For the little bed (Fig. 89) use a long envelope. If the top lap is
open, cut it off. Flatten out the bottom fold as you did for the frog's
back, then bend the ends and sides as in Fig. 90. Bend up the points at
each end for head and footboards, and there is your bed.


=The Table=

Make the table (Fig. 91) of a smaller envelope in the same way, but
leave the points extending out at the ends (Fig. 90) and cut short legs
on the bottom edge (Fig. 91).

[Illustration: FIG. 90--Fold the envelope this way for the bed.]

[Illustration: FIG. 91--Make the table of a smaller envelope.]

[Illustration: FIG. 92--A comfortable little sofa.]

Plates and other dishes can be made very easily. For circular dishes use
a cent or a ten-cent piece for a pattern. Very effective cups and
goblets can be made from old pieces of tinfoil. The table, however, is
strong enough to hold the little china or tin dishes usually found among
a child's collection of toys.


=The Sofa=

The comfortable little high-backed sofa (Fig. 92) is made of a long
envelope with the top left open. Fold the envelope into the box shape,
as for the bed, with the points turned up. Then fold the tips of the
points inward, as in Fig. 93. Now reverse the box and slit down the two
front edges which gives an opening in front. Bend down this front piece
and cut it off on a line with the two ends.

[Illustration: FIG. 93--Fold the tips of the points inward.]


=The Arm-Chair=

A deep, low-seated arm-chair can be made of an oblong envelope of
ordinary size by following the directions for the sofa and allowing the
back to curve instead of making it flat, then slitting down the sides
and bending them over to form the arms (Fig. 94).

[Illustration: FIG. 94--Make the arm-chair of an oblong envelope.]


=The Bath Tub.=

[Illustration: FIG. 95--A little bath tub for imaginary water.]

A little bath tub, but one that will scarcely hold water, is shown in
Fig. 95. In this the upper lap is left open, the points are bent
under, and the sides left to curve naturally. A baby carriage can also
be made in this way, but for the carriage the points must extend down
and have wheels drawn on them and the tips must be cut off squarely at
the bottom so that the carriage will stand. The lap is the back and the
handle in one (Fig. 96).

[Illustration: FIG. 96--A doll-baby can ride in this carriage.]

[Illustration: FIG. 97--The bungalow is made of a long envelope.]


=The Bungalow=

The little bungalow (Fig. 97) is something very different, yet it, too,
is made of an envelope. Though it appears to have many parts it is all
in one piece. The envelope is a long one, such as is used for legal
papers. Fig. 98 gives the pattern. The heavy lines show where to cut and
the dotted lines where to bend. The lap forms the front porch, but the
porch may be left off entirely if the envelope has been slit at the top
in opening it. With a little care, however, many envelopes can be opened
intact. Cut along the heavy lines of the door and windows, then open the
door and the little shutters. Bend back the ends of the house and in the
middle of each end take a little plait from top to bottom. This is to
make the ends narrower and give room for the roof to slant. Bend the
roof back from the eaves along the dotted line. The back of the bungalow
is made like the front, except that it has no door, windows, or porch.

Children who have a knack at drawing can greatly improve the bungalow by
drawing the slats to the blinds, drawing in the panelling on the front
door, putting on the knob, putting shingles on the roof, etc., etc.

[Illustration: FIG. 98--Draw the bungalow on the envelope in this way.]


=The Cart=

The little cart (Fig. 99), that will hold quite a heavy doll, and can be
trundled about like one made of wood, is not cut at all.

[Illustration: FIG. 99--The cart can be trundled about like one made of
wood.]

[Illustration: FIG. 100--This is the way to put wheels on the cart.]

Fold an oblong envelope into the box shape (Fig. 93), with points turned
up, but let the points be deeper than for the bed or sofa. This is
because the ends of the envelope are to form the sides of the cart and
must be longer from front to back. Bend the tips of the points in and
crease the folds sharply that they may lie flat against the sides.
Sharpen one end of a small, round stick and push it through the middle
of the folded point on one side, then slide a large, empty spool on the
stick and thrust the point of the stick through the opposite side (Fig.
100). The stick should stand out beyond the cart about half an inch on
each side, and will need no fastening.

Puncture a hole in one end of the cart, thread a cotton string through
the hole, tie a large knot on the inside end and pull the string through
until the knot presses close against the end of the cart. Let the string
be long enough to reach easily from the floor to the little hand that
will hold the other end.

Besides all these toys, a baby's cradle that has rockers and will rock,
a cunning little dressing-table with its mirror, boxes of different
shapes and sizes, and various kinds of baskets can be made of the old
envelope. Probably there are other forms it may be made to assume--boats
perhaps, that for a time at least will float on the water, and animals
other than the frog.




CHAPTER VIII

TOYS OF CLOTHESPINS


YOU can make cunning, soft, downy hens and roosters simply of raw cotton
and clothespins (Fig. 101). The little creatures may be pure white, dark
colored, or part dark and part light, according to the cotton used.

[Illustration: FIG. 101--Soft, downy hens and roosters.]

All of


=The Chickens=

have the same kind of foundation. It is made by sliding the prongs of
two clothespins into each other (Fig. 102). Be sure the clothespins,
when together, stand firm on the prong ends, for these form the legs and
feet of the chickens.

[Illustration: FIG. 102--Slide the prongs of two clothespins together.]

[Illustration: FIG. 103--Tie a piece of raw cotton over the head of one
clothespin.]

With a string tie a piece of raw cotton over the head of one clothespin;
have the string tight, but the cotton cover rather loose. Bring the
cotton partly down the clothespin and tie it again (Fig. 103); then use
your fingers to shape the top cotton into the form of a rooster's head;
gently pull a little of it out to make the beak; tie a string around the
beak where it joins the head, and, with thumb and finger slightly
dampened, twist the end of the beak into a point (Fig. 104). Cotton
which comes in sheets is best for the tail, but the other will do. Lay
the centre of a generous piece of cotton over the head of the second
clothespin, plait the loose ends around the pin, and fasten with a
string, making the edge of the tail in a line with the opening of the
prongs of the pin. Cut the folded end rounded on top, and slit it up a
short distance into wide fringe to form the long feathers of the
rooster's tail (Fig. 104).

[Illustration: FIG. 104--Pull a little of the cotton out to make a
beak.]

[Illustration: FIG. 105--A fine little rooster that will move his little
head.]

With another piece of cotton cover the back and sides of the rooster, as
you would put a saddle on a horse. Bring the edges of the cover together
down the neck and body; when fitted lift the cover, put paste here and
there on its under side near the edge, replace the cover and it will
stick fast; then, with the top of a wire hairpin, push the edges of the
cover, front and back, in between the open prongs of the clothespin. Ink
round bits of paper and paste on the rooster for eyes; make his comb and
wattles of red tissue paper (Fig. 105), and you will have a fine rooster
which can actually


=Move His Little Cotton Head=

up and down, fast or slow, as you wish. To make him do so, hold the
front leg steady with your left hand, while with your right hand you
raise and lower the other leg. Try it, and see how naturally the little
fellow appears to pick up corn in an eager, hungry manner.

[Illustration: FIG. 106--The little hen.]

[Illustration: FIG. 107--Making a downy little lamb out of a
clothespin.]

Fashion the hen in the same way you made the rooster, only have the tail
smaller and without long feathers (Fig. 106). The comb on the hen must
also be smaller than that on the rooster. The general shape of the hen
is the same as that of the rooster. Notice that the direction of outline
along the lower edge of tail and body is one continuous slanting line;
remember this when adjusting the tail that it may not stand out backward
at right angles from the body.


=The Little Lambs=

are made in much the same way as the chickens. Slide two clothespins
together for the foundation (Fig. 102); tie a wad of cotton over the
head of one pin, then pull the head out a trifle on each side for ears,
and tie with a string as you made the rooster's beak. Cover the second
clothespin, making the upper part, which extends down, quite thick; then
lift the upper part, and bring it across to the lamb's neck, for the
little animal must have an almost level back (Fig. 107). Cut a piece of
cotton large enough to cover the entire back and sides of the lamb, lay
it over the lamb like a very large saddle, and fasten it in place with
paste. Use small inked papers for eyes, and tie a gay ribbon around his
neck (Fig. 108). Make a number of little lambs, for they are so
attractive and pretty grouped together (Fig. 109).

[Illustration: FIG. 108--Tie a gay ribbon around the lamb's neck.]

[Illustration: FIG. 109--The group of sheep.]

[Illustration: FIG. 110--Such a funny little long-eared rabbit.]

[Illustration: FIG. 111--The doggie's head is large.]


=The Rabbit=

(Fig. 110) has the same kind of foundation as the lamb, but stretched
out more, bringing the heads of the pins lower and farther apart. He
needs very long ears, so they must be of separate pieces of sheet cotton
tied to the head. Make his head rather large, and in other respects
manufacture him much the same as the lamb.


=The Ears and Tail of a Dog=

are too large for pulling out and tying from the main piece of cotton,
so cut them separate and tie on at the proper places. Make the doggie's
head large, and the saddle-like cover thick, that the little fellow may
be plump and fat; cut inked paper for eyes and end of nose; with these
exceptions the work is the same as on the lamb (Fig. 107).

When tying beaks, ears, and tails of the various animals, cut the string
ends close to the knot; then the string will sink into the cotton.

[Illustration: FIG. 112--Begin to dress the doll in this way.]

[Illustration: FIG. 113--A strip of cotton for arms.]

To dress a


=Little Girl Doll,=

cut a strip of cotton extending from below the neck line of the
clothespin to within a short distance of the ends of the prongs; tie the
cotton in gathers around the lower edge of the neck, and again lower
down at the belt line (Fig. 112). Make the arms of a strip of cotton
about four and a quarter inches long and one inch wide; slash in the
middle a short distance, and slip the strip over the head of the pin
(Fig. 113); bend at the shoulders, fold remaining lengths once for arms,
and, with dampened thumb and finger, lightly twist the ends into hands.
The edges of the cotton forming arms and hands will cling together. Tie
a bright ribbon sash around Miss Dolly's waist; then make her hair of a
strip of dark raw cotton; fit and press it on the wooden head, twisting
the ends to resemble long braids; pinch the cotton up on the top of the
head to form a pompadour; when adjusted take the wig off; cover the
wooden head with paste, and replace the wig, setting it well back from
the front of the head. Fasten a ribbon bow back of the pompadour, and
tie the braids together at the nape of the neck with another ribbon;
then ink the features. Insert the ends of the prongs of the clothespin
forming dolly's feet into a small piece of double-faced corrugated straw
board, fasten them in with paste, and the little girl will stand alone
(Fig. 114). The doll's back is shown in Fig. 115.

[Illustration: FIG. 114--Little girl doll made of a clothespin and
dressed in raw cotton.]

[Illustration: FIG. 115--Miss Dolly's back.]

[Illustration: FIG. 116--The clothespin boy.]

Make the


=Boy Doll=

(Fig. 116) stand in the same manner; fashion his hair of dark cotton,
his trousers of a strip of white cotton tied around the waist and pushed
in between the prongs of the clothespins. Cut the coat from a folded
piece of cotton, a hole in the centre of the fold for the head to pass
through; straight sleeves horizontally cut along the fold; and the
remainder in sacque form like a Japanese coat or pajamas. The sleeves
form the arms and the hands of the boy.

Fasten a belt high at the back and low in the front around his waist,
giving the coat a Russian-blouse effect; make him a ribbon bow necktie,
and ink the features.

These small people are very bewitching, as are also the animals.

You can color the sheet cotton slightly here and there with water-color
paint if you are clever with a paint brush. As you work with these
little dolls and animals you will find ever so many ways to vary them in
effect. They are so soft and fluffy that a baby can play with them
without injury, and a school or college boy may be amused by being
presented with one, appropriately dressed, as a souvenir of pleasant
experiences at a college luncheon or dinner.

To make a foot-ball player, finish the blouse without necktie or belt;
make the shoulders wide and the hair rather short, like a college boy's
rough head. So much for the boy. Paste a letter cut out of colored paper
on the front of the blouse to make it look like a college sweater, and
gather the trousers in a little at the knees. You can tuck an egg-shaped
ball made of brown raw wool under one arm for a realistic touch, if you
choose.

Little girl dolls may be similarly made to represent basket-ball players
in short skirts and school or college sweaters, with appropriate emblems
on the front, for a special entertainment.

Making these figures is much less trouble than dressing dolls entails,
and much more of a novelty, too. They take so many shapes that they fit
almost any occasion.

In fact, the possibilities of these cotton and clothespin toys are
almost endless in the hands of ingenious young people.




CHAPTER IX

SCRAP-BOOKS


=Mother Goose Scrap-Book=

THE nursery scrap-books made of linen or colored cambric are, perhaps,
familiar to most of our readers; but for the benefit of those who may
not yet have seen these durable little books, we will give the following
directions for making one:

Cut from a piece of strong linen, colored cambric, or white muslin, four
oblongs twenty-four inches long by twelve inches wide. Buttonhole-stitch
the edges all around with some bright-colored worsted, then place the
oblongs neatly together and stitch them directly through the centre with
strong thread (Fig. 117). Fold them over, stitch again, as in Fig. 118,
and your book is finished and ready for the pictures.

[Illustration: FIG. 117--Scrap-book opened and stitched through the
middle.]

[Illustration: FIG. 118--Scrap-book folded and then stitched.]

It is in the preparation of these pictures that you will find the
novelty of the plan I propose. Instead of pasting in cards and pictures
which have become too familiar to awaken interest, let the young
book-makers design and form their own pictures by cutting special
figures, or parts of figures, from different cards, and then pasting
them together so as to form new combinations.

[Illustration: FIG. 119--Three Wise Men of Gotham.]

[Illustration: FIG. 121--Little Jack Horner.]

Any subject which pleases the fancy can be illustrated in this way, and
the children will soon be deeply interested in the work and delighted at
the strange and striking pictorial characters that can be produced by
ingenious combinations.

Stories and little poems may be very nicely and aptly illustrated; but
the "Mother Goose Melodies" are, perhaps, the most suitable subjects
with which to interest younger children, as they will be easily
recognized by the little folk.

Take, for instance, the "Three Wise Men of Gotham," who went to sea in a
bowl. Will not Fig. 119 serve very well as an illustration of the
subject? Yet these figures are cut from advertising cards, and no two
from the same card. Fig. 120 shows the materials; Fig. 119 shows the
result of combining them.

Again, the little man dancing so gaily (Fig. 122) is turned into "Little
Jack Horner" eating his Christmas pie (Fig. 121), by merely cutting off
his legs and substituting a dress skirt and pair of feet clipped from
another card. The Christmas pie in his lap is from still another card.

In making pictures of this kind, figures that were originally standing
may be forced to sit; babies may be placed in arms which, on the cards
they were stolen from, held only cakes of soap, perhaps, or boxes of
blacking; heads may be ruthlessly torn from bodies to which they belong,
and as ruthlessly clapped upon strange shoulders; and you will be
surprised to see what amusing, and often excellent, illustrations
present themselves as the result of a little ingenuity in clipping and
pasting.

[Illustration: FIG. 120--Materials for Three Wise Men of Gotham.]

[Illustration: FIG. 122--Materials for Little Jack Horner.]

Another kind, which we shall call the


=Transformation Scrap-Book=

will be found exceedingly amusing on account of the various and
ever-changing pictures it presents.

Unlike any other, where the picture once pasted in must remain ever the
same, the transformation scrap-book alters one picture many times. To
work these transformations, a blank book is the first article required;
one eight inches long by six and a half or seven wide is a good size.

Cut the pages of this book across, one-third the way down. Fig. 123
shows how this should be done. The three-cornered piece cut out near the
binding allows the pages to be turned without catching or tearing. Leave
the first page uncut; also the one in the middle of the book.

Cut from picture-cards, or old toy-books which have colored
illustrations, the odd and funny figures of men and women, boys and
girls, selecting those which will give variety of costumes and
attitudes.

[Illustration: FIG. 123--Transformation scrap-book with pages cut.]

Paste the figure of a woman or a girl on the first page, placing it so
that when the lower part of the next page is turned the upper edge of it
will come across the neck of the figure where it is joined on to the
shoulders.

Cut the heads from the rest of the pictured women, turn the lower part
of the next page and, choosing a body as different as possible from the
one just used, paste it upon the lower part of the second page, directly
under the head belonging to the first body. Upon the upper part of the
second page paste any one of the other heads, being careful to place it
so that it will fit the body. Continue in this way, pasting the heads
upon the upper, and the bodies on the lower, part of the page, until the
space allowed for the women is filled up; then, commencing at the page
left in the middle of the book, paste upon it the figure of a man, and
continue in the same manner as with the women, until the spaces are all
used and the book is complete.

The combinations formed in this way are very funny. Old heads with
young bodies; young heads with old bodies; then one head with a great
variety of bodies, and so on.

The first picture may represent a man, tall, thin, dressed in a rowing
costume, as shown in the illustration. Turn the lower part of the next
page, and no longer is he thin and tall, but short and stout, the
position of this body giving the expression of amazement, even to the
face. The next page turned shows him to be neither tall nor short, thick
nor thin, but a soldier, well-proportioned, who is looking over his
shoulder in the most natural manner possible (Fig. 124).

[Illustration: FIG. 124--Leaves from a transformation scrap-book.]

The figures in Fig. 124 were cut from advertising cards, and the head
belongs to none of the bodies.

A curious fact in arranging the pictures in this way is that the heads
all look as though they might really belong to any of the various bodies
given them.

Instead of having but one figure on a page, groups may be formed of both
men and women, and in the different arrangement of the figures they can
be made very ludicrous indeed.


=Flour Paste=

Mix one-half cup of flour with enough cold water to make a very thin
batter, which must be smooth and free from lumps; put the batter on top
of the stove--not next to the fire--in a tin saucepan, and stir
continually until it boils; then remove from the stove, add three drops
of oil of cloves, and pour the paste into a cup or tumbler. This will
keep for a long time and will not become sour.




CHAPTER X

TOYS MADE OF COMMON KINDLING WOOD


JUST a glance at a pile of ordinary every-day kindling wood could hardly
suggest to one the possibilities existing in the crude material for
building all sorts of interesting and realistic things for the little
folks, but experiment and you will find that Klondike log-houses,
rail-fences and lumber camps, bridges, and substantial little rafts
which will float on water in laundry or bath tub, pond or stream, can be
easily and readily built from the little sticks we use to start our
fires.

Let us build


=The Bridge=

first, that Indians and men may cross the water to the lumber region
beyond, and cut logs for their rafts (Fig. 125).

Select two sticks of kindling wood as near of a size as you can find,
and lay them side by side, a short distance apart; then connect the two
by placing sticks across the ends, log-cabin fashion. These four sticks
form the square foundation of one bridge pier.

Continue building by crossing the second layer of sticks with a third
layer, the third layer with a fourth layer, and so on until the pier is
built up sufficiently high, six or more layers, according to the
thickness of the sticks. As you build be sure that the two sticks
forming each layer lie absolutely steady and are of about the same
thickness, that those built on top of them may not slant, but lie level
and steady.

All sticks should be of the same length, but the layers may vary in
thickness; one layer of sticks might be thin and the next thick; it
matters not, provided that the two forming the same layer are nearly of
a size.

[Illustration: FIG. 125--The little bridge built of kindling wood.]

When the first pier is finished, build a second one like it a short
distance from the first one, and lay a strip of stiff pasteboard, cut
from an old box, across from pier to pier; then lay a second strip of
pasteboard from one pier to the ground, a third strip from the remaining
pier to the ground on the opposite side (Fig. 125). If you wish, the two
end strips can be longer than those shown in the photograph, and slant
from the piers down to the ground on a level with the water. The banks
in the photograph are built up with boxes and covered with green cloth.

For each of the two archways, take two thin sticks of wood and stand
them at the top outward edge of the pier, with ends braced together at
the top, and spread out at the bottom, as in the photograph.

Use either natural or tissue-paper trees stuck into empty spools for
foliage, or little toy trees, if you happen to have them among the
children's store toys.

Though the bridge is not intended to be over real water, you might try
the experiment and strengthen the hollow piers by filling them with
stones, when building the bridge out-of-doors.

[Illustration: FIG. 126--Kindling-wood rafts that will float on real
water.]

Fig. 126 shows two little


=Kindling-Wood Rafts=

which will float on real water. Have the slender sticks for the raft all
of the same length, and use about sixteen or eighteen sticks for each
raft. Weave them together with a string. Begin by tying the centre of a
long string around each end of a stick, which should be about eight
inches in length (Fig. 127).

Place one end of a second stick up against one tie, allowing one string
to come over and the other string under the second stick (Fig. 128).
Cross the two lengths of the string over the second stick, bringing the
lower string up and the upper string down (Fig. 129); then lay another
stick up against the crossed strings, carrying the strings in turn over
this stick (Fig. 130). Again, bring the lower string up and the upper
string down, before placing another stick. Continue crossing the string
and adding kindling wood until the raft is of the desired length. Tie
the ends of the string securely on the last stick, and weave the
opposite loose ends of the sticks together in the same way, tying the
string firmly together on the last stick. Clip off the ends of the
string and the raft will then be ready for the water, and will carry
either passengers or freight.

[Illustration: FIG. 127--Begin the raft in this way.]

[Illustration: FIG. 128--Lay a second stick up against the tie.]

[Illustration: FIG. 129--Cross the strings around the second stick.]

[Illustration: FIG. 130--Cross the strings around the third stick.]

Put up log-houses for the toy people to live in. Select two different
lengths of kindling wood for


=The Houses=

that the buildings may be longer one way than the other. They will look
better and be more comfortable than if square.

Place two long sticks of kindling wood a short distance apart and
running parallel; across these sticks lay two shorter ones, bridging the
space at each end between the long sticks, then place two long sticks
over the ends of the two short ones; keep building in this way until the
little house is seven or eight layers high.

[Illustration: FIG. 131--A Klondike settlement with dog train and
sledge.]

Cut a piece of white cardboard or light-weight pasteboard the length of
the house, and wider than the width of the house, to allow for the slant
of the roof. Bend the roof lengthwise through the centre and lay it on
top of the house (Fig. 131). Make a door of stiff pasteboard painted or
covered with a layer of brown tissue-paper pasted on the outside. Cut
the door a suitable size and stand it up in front of the house.

If you want


=An Arctic Scene=

spread a piece of white cloth over a table for the snowy ground. Canton
flannel, fleecy side up, is best, but any kind will answer the purpose.
Then erect several kindling-wood houses and form a Klondike settlement
(Fig. 131).

Original home-made toy men, dogs, and sled may be used to complete the
scene, or they can be cut from newspapers or old magazines. Stiffen by
pasting them on cardboard; then cut out the men, dogs, and sled more
carefully in detail. Bend one leg forward and one backward to make the
men stand alone, and bend two legs outward and two inward to enable the
dogs to stand. Paste narrow strips of paper on the dogs for harness.

[Illustration: FIG. 132--The Virginia rail-fence.]

Make another kindling-wood scene like Fig. 132.


=Rail-Fences=

are peculiar to America. You cannot find them abroad, and every little
boy and girl will want to know how to build one of these old-fashioned
"snake" or Virginia rail-fences. The fence may be of any length, its
zigzag lines can run in any direction, all the way across the room if
you choose.

[Illustration: FIG. 133--Form a rude letter V.]

[Illustration: FIG. 134--Across the end of the second stick place the
end of a third stick.]

Lay down one piece of kindling wood, and over one end place the end of
another stick, forming a rude letter V (Fig. 133). Across the end of the
second stick which rests on the ground, place the end of a third stick
(Fig. 134). Keep on building the first layer of the fence in this way
until it stretches as far as you wish; then go back to the starting
point and begin building the second layer of sticks, by placing a stick
over the first stick, resting one end on the far end of the first stick,
the other end on the top of the end of the second stick; lay another
stick across over the second stick, another over the third, and so on
until the second layer is finished. Build other layers in like manner,
and make the fence high or low, as desired. Pile up kindling wood into a
wood-pile with small pieces scattered on the ground, and if there is a
toy horse you can make him haul more wood (Fig. 132).

These kindling-wood toys will give a realistic idea of log-houses,
rail-fences, log rafts, and primitive bridges, and while building them
the children might be told stories of the way early settlers lived and
made their homes, or the children may "make up" stories about the
different scenes.


=Hammocks=

Substantial little hammocks which will hold good-sized dolls, and even a
real pussy with no danger of the material breaking, can be made of
ordinary kindling wood or strips of pasteboard (Fig. 135). Both styles
of hammocks are woven in the same manner. The weaving is like that used
for the raft and is of the simplest, most primitive kind, merely
crossing of the two ends of each side string between each piece of wood
(or pasteboard) slat, with loops of string left at each end of the
hammock for hanging it up. When fashioned of kindling wood, like that in
the photograph, have the sticks slender and all of the same length. When
made of pasteboard, cut seven-inch-wide strips from a heavy pasteboard
box and cut the strips crosswise into one-half-inch slats. Have ready
two long strings measuring about two and a half yards each. Double each
string and tie a knot in the closed end, fifteen inches from the extreme
folded end, then place your work on the top of the table, or some other
flat surface where you can keep the slats flat and even. Begin to weave
by laying a slat between the loose ends of each string.

[Illustration: FIG. 135--A substantial little hammock.]

Push the slat up tight against the knots and cross the strings on the
outer edge of the slat. Slide another slat between the two ends of each
side string, shoving it close up against the crossed strings at the
outer edge of the first slat. Bring one end of each string over and one
under the second slat, cross them, and add the third slat. Continue
weaving in this way until the hammock is of sufficient length, then tie
the strings securely at the outer edge of the last slat.

After you have put in the last board bring the slats up very close
together and draw the strings firm and tight. Tie the double lengths of
string together at each end of the hammock, making two long loops by
which to hang up the hammock.




CHAPTER XI

LITTLE TWIG PEOPLE


HAVE you seen the little people who live up in the trees? Little twig
people who dance and swing and bob about, who nod and bow and flutter
hither and yon; some astride funny twig horses, others dangling head
down, many waiting to run a race when a stiff breeze comes along, and
all as merry as merry can be, tossing their long, thin arms and legs in
the air just for the fun of it. Perhaps some of these queer folk are
outside your window now, and it may be near enough to the ground for
even the littlest boys and girls to reach if they stand on their toes.
Here are several of the twig people who came down and posed for their
photographs. We will give each one a name.

Fig. 145 is Miss Daffy-down-dilly, who has just come to town and is
feeling very bashful about it.

Fig. 148 is Jack-be-nimble Jack-be-quick, who thinks he can jump over
any candlestick, high or low.

Fig. 151 is the Little Crooked Man who ran a crooked mile.

Fig. 152 is Little Miss Muffet, who is so terribly afraid of the spider.

Fig. 153 is Peter White, who follows his nose wherever he goes.

Fig. 154 is Doctor Foster, who went to Gloster in a shower of rain, and
he is stepping very high to avoid falling into the puddle we have all
heard about.

The little twig people do not look quite as real when separated from the
tree as when you see them dancing in the breeze, so it is necessary to
help out their appearance with paper heads and hands and feet.

Use care in selecting your twigs, for they are not all alike. Some are
quite choice and unique, others more commonplace and less amusing.
Suitable ones may be found in plenty.

[Illustration: FIG. 136--The black bands on the twigs show where they
should be trimmed off.]

[Illustration: FIG. 137--Fastening the twig.]

When a small branch is broken from a tree or bush, you will find that
some of the twigs attached look like queer, crooked, little legs, and
some, just the right distance above, seem made for arms. Then comes the
long neck that is joined, perhaps, to the still larger branch or to the
trunk of the tree. Sometimes there are several arms and several legs
too many and you must look closely and decide which are the real ones;
then cut off the others.

You will know the real


=Arms and Legs=

for they are always the funniest ones and the most suggestive of comical
action.

Cut the long neck down in proportion to the rest of the body and trim
the arms and legs off to the proper length. Remember that one inch of
the neck of the dolls must be inserted in the head and allow for that in
cutting the long stem.

Fig. 136 gives a branch as it looks when taken from the tree, and the
black bands on the twigs show where they should be trimmed off to bring
the little figure into proportions. The parts left white or in outline,
below the bands, are to be cut away. There are two legs to this branch
and three arms, one of which must be dispensed with. The left arm must
remain and it matters but little which of the right arms is selected. In
this case the lower one is marked to be cut.

Now comes the making of the


=Heads, Hands, and Feet=

These must all be double, for, to hold them on, the twigs are pasted
between the two halves. In some cases, where the neck is quite thick,
you will find it best to shave off a little at front and back to flatten
it, so that the neck may lie easily between the two parts of the head
and not push the face out of shape (Fig. 137). This is seldom necessary,
however, unless the doll is unusually large.

Figs. 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, and 143 give the heads of all our little
troupe sufficiently large to be copied. Fig. 144 shows the hands and
feet.

[Illustration: FIG. 138--Daffy-down-dilly.]

[Illustration: FIG. 139--Little Miss Muffet.]

[Illustration: FIG. 140--Jack-be-nimble.]

[Illustration: FIG. 141--The Little Crooked Man.]

[Illustration: FIG. 142--Peter White.]

[Illustration: FIG. 143--Doctor Foster.]

Use a heavy brown wrapping paper for the heads and draw the faces simply
with pen and ink in broad lines, or, if the children want to color
them, they can use water-colors or colored pencils. In any case the
features should be strongly marked, that the character of the face may
not be lost.

[Illustration: FIG. 144--Hands and feet.]

You can make the hands of paper like the face, or of dark brown paper
(not tissue), to match the dark brown arms. White hands will give the
effect of white gloves. Make the feet brown or black, or use bright
colored paper to represent colored shoes.


=Daffy-Down-Dilly=

is quite a tall girl, standing eighteen inches high in her heel-less
shoes (Fig. 145). Her head, shown in Fig. 138, measures three inches
from top to chin; this does not include the swirl of hair which rises in
a peak above the head. Her hands, A (Fig. 144), are two and a quarter
inches long from wrist to tip of middle finger, and her feet, B (Fig.
144), are two and three-quarter inches long.

These are the proportions. Of course, for a smaller doll they should be
smaller.

Fold a piece of wrapping paper, making it double, and on the paper draw
Daffy's head, copying the one in Fig. 138, or making an original head if
you prefer. The back hair may be drawn in or painted if the children
insist upon having an all-around doll. If the neck is thick shave it off
as in Fig. 137. Draw two hands on double pieces of paper and two feet on
double pieces of paper, and cut them out. Daffy's hands are the color of
her face, and her shoes are black.

[Illustration: FIG. 145--Daffy-down-dilly.]

Now cover the inside of the back of the head with paste, lay the neck on
the head and cover that too with paste (Fig. 137). Then fit the front of
the head to the back and press it down until the two halves, with the
twig between, are pasted firmly together. In the same way paste on the
hands and feet. Make Daffy's dress of yellow tissue-paper, the color of
a daffodil. Cut a circle for the skirt with a small hole in the centre
and slit it down the back;' then draw it through your hands to shape it
and make it hang nicely.

Cut out a little waist with pointed sleeves, like Fig. 146, and a
pointed collar, like Fig. 147. Make the waist double with the fold at
the top, cut a hole for the neck, and slit down the back. Use green
tissue-paper for the collar.

[Illustration: FIG. 146--Waist of Daffy.]

[Illustration: FIG. 147--Collar of Daffy.]

Put the waist on the doll, gather it at the belt line, front and back,
and paste. Paste it also at the neck and along the under edge of the
sleeves. Paste the skirt to the waist at the belt, bring the edges of
the slit together at the back, lap them, and paste. Wrap a strip of the
yellow paper around the waist for a belt, then put the collar around the
neck, and fasten with a touch of paste.


=Jack-be-Nimble=

came from the elm tree. He is ten inches tall from his cap to the sole
of his shoe (Fig. 148). You will find his head in Fig. 140. C (Fig. 144)
is the pattern for his hands, and D (Fig. 144) the pattern for his feet,
which are made of brown paper. His brilliant costume is fashioned of
orange-colored tissue-paper. Cut the coat like Fig. 149, making it
double, with the fold at the top of the high flaring collar. Cut a hole
for the neck and make a small slit down in front, then turn back the
points of the collar at the neck. To avoid slitting the coat all the
way to the bottom, put it on little Jack before you adjust his head. His
neck can be slipped through the hole without trouble; then the edges of
the coat are pasted together. Each leg of the short trousers is made
separately, of an oblong piece of tissue-paper. This is gathered at the
knee and waist line and pasted in place (Fig. 150). If the stripes on
Jack's cap are painted orange color and his pointed shoes are also
orange, the effect of his bright costume will be still more glowing.

[Illustration: FIG. 148--Jack-be-nimble.]


=The Little Crooked Man=

belongs to the fir-tree family, and as he is clothed only in his little
rough suit of brown bark, you can see (Fig. 151) how the twigs grow that
form his arms and legs. These are in such positions and have such
peculiar curves he would look as if running even without hands and feet,
but the proper adjustment of hands as well as feet emphasizes the
action. Both are turned in the direction in which he is going, and one
foot is lifted while the other rests on its heel, giving the
stepping-forward effect.

You will find the Crooked Man's head in Fig. 141. His hands are cut from
brown paper, like C (Fig. 144), and his feet, which are also brown, are
like E (Fig. 144).


=Little Miss Muffet=

the largest of the dolls (Fig. 152), is twenty inches high. Her head
(Fig. 139) measures four inches from top to chin and four inches across
at its widest part. Her hands are made of brown paper, like F (Fig.
144), and her high-heeled shoes, like G (Fig. 144), are black. Her head
is tilted to one side and the thumbs of both hands turn in.

[Illustration: FIG. 149--Pattern of Jack-be-nimble's coat.]

[Illustration: FIG. 150--Each leg of the trousers is made separately.]

[Illustration: FIG. 151--The Little Crooked Man.]

[Illustration: FIG. 152--Little Miss Muffet.]

You can make Miss Muffet's dress any color you like, the brighter and
gayer the better. Cut the skirt and waist as you did for
Daffy-down-dilly, but do not point the sleeves. Make an apron of two
squares of white tissue-paper--a large and a small one. Use the large
square for the skirt of the apron and the small square for the bib.
Gather the top edge of the large square and the bottom edge of the small
square, and paste to the dress at the belt line; then make a white belt
and tie in a bow at the back.

For the hat, cut a circle of tissue-paper the color of the dress, put a
little paste in the centre, and pinch it down on the top loop of Miss
Muffet's hair, tipping it a little to one side. This will give a crown.
Turn up the brim at the back and lift it in front to stand out straight.
Fringe a small piece of black paper for a feather and paste it to the
crown of the hat.

[Illustration: FIG. 153--Peter White.]


=Peter White=

is sturdy compared with the other people (Fig. 153). He came from the
cherry tree and is ten inches high. The main stem, to which the smaller
twigs are attached, forms his neck, body, and left leg, and is so large
that both neck and ankle had to be shaved off somewhat before his head
and left shoe could be pasted on. Originally the twig that forms his
left arm extended beyond the joint at the elbow, but it was cut off, and
the smaller twig was allowed to remain to give the comical bend to the
arm which adds greatly to the appearance of the haste and the swinging
arms of a pedestrian.

Peter White's head is given in Fig. 142. His brown hands are cut like H
(Fig. 144), and his black shoes like I (Fig. 144).

This doll is the only one whose head is in profile, but it shows that
when the shape of the twig suggests it, a profile is very effective; and
it is usually the easiest for children to draw.


=Doctor Foster=

is also ten inches high (Fig. 154). His head, with smiling face, is
given in Fig. 143. His brown paper hands are cut like J (Fig. 144), and
his black shoes like E (Fig. 144). He wears his trousers quite short,
that they may not get wet in the famous Gloster puddle, or if they do
they will dry quickly. The trousers are made of wrapping paper, double,
of course, and pasted together at the edges after they have been
adjusted. They are cut like Fig. 155.

[Illustration: FIG. 154--Doctor Foster.]

[Illustration: FIG. 155--Doctor Foster's short trousers.]




CHAPTER XII

VISITING-CARD HOUSES


FROM old visiting cards you can build all the different houses and
furniture seen in the accompanying illustrations.

[Illustration: FIG. 156--The little tropical house in Uncle Sam's newly
acquired possessions. Made of old visiting cards.]

For the little


=Tropical House=

in Uncle Sam's newly acquired possessions (Fig. 156), select eight of
your largest and stiffest visiting cards; these are for the four walls
of the first or lower story of the house. If the cards are not alike in
size, make them so by trimming off the edges of the larger cards.

Place two of the cards together and cut two slashes, one on each side of
the centre, through one end of the double layer (Fig. 157). Slide the
two cut ends together, allowing the centre divisions, A (Fig. 157), to
lie, one over and one under the two cards. This will bring under the
side divisions B and B (Fig. 157), on the card whose centre division A
comes on top, while the divisions B and B of the other card will come
over on the outside (Fig. 158). Fasten all of the remaining cards
together in pairs in the same manner; then cut a long slit near the
outer edge of each of the four pairs of cards, C and C (Fig. 159). Slide
the walls together at right angles, and form a square by means of the
long slits. Do this by holding the open end of one long slit in one wall
under, and at right angles to the open end of one long slit in another
wall, and then fitting the two walls into each other so that they will
stand firm and form one corner of the lower story of the house (Fig.
160).

[Illustration: FIG. 157--Place two cards together and cut two slashes.]

[Illustration: FIG. 158--Slide the cards together this way.]

[Illustration: FIG. 159--Slide the two cards together this way to make
the wall.]

[Illustration: FIG. 160--Slide the walls together at right angles by
means of long slits.]

Strengthen the house with an extra inside wall. Cut long slits in each
end of the extra wall, then a long slit near the centre of each side
wall in which to fit the extra wall.

Make the ceiling of the lower story of two more pairs of cards fastened
together like Fig. 158, and on the ends of each pair of cards cut
similar divisions, only have them quite short (Fig. 161). Bend down all
of the end divisions and fit the strips over across the top of the first
story from front to back, bringing the two corner divisions, D and D
(Fig. 161), on the outside of the wall, while you slide the centre part,
E, on the inside (Fig. 162). Dotted lines indicate the division E on the
inside.

[Illustration: FIG. 161--Cut short slits on the end of the ceiling
cards.]

The second story must be built entire before it can be fastened on top
of the first story.

Make each of the four walls of the second story three cards long. Cut
divisions on both ends of the middle card to fit in the end cards (Fig.
163).

When cutting divisions, always fit together the two cards that are to be
joined, and cut through the double layer, which will insure having the
divisions alike.

When the four walls are ready to be put together, cut a window in the
two end cards of the wall which you intend for the front (Fig. 164).
Only the lower edge and sides of the window may be cut; the upper edge
is merely bent and throws the solid window shutter, formed of the piece
cut, outward, as shown in the photograph.

Slide the four walls together and add a fifth wall, to run through the
centre from side to side, for strength. Use the long slit method for
joining the centre wall to the side walls.

When built, turn the second story upside down and fit a strip of three
cards, bridge-like, over the centre from front to back, and fasten it to
the bottom of the walls as you attached the ceiling of the first story;
then fit on another strip in like manner over the centre from side to
side, and fasten it to the bottom of the side walls. The two strips will
cross each other at their centres, one lying at right angles over the
other.

[Illustration: FIG. 162--Fasten ceiling on lower story by sliding the
centre division inside, and the two side divisions outside, the wall.]

[Illustration: FIG. 163--Middle card for wall of second story.]

Carefully lift the second story and adjust it squarely and evenly on top
of the first story, as in the photograph (Fig. 156).

[Illustration: FIG. 164--Walls for second story. Details of the
visiting-card houses.]

Make the projecting roof of the second story of four strips of four
cards each. Run the strips from side to side of the house and lap them a
trifle, one over the other. The roof is merely laid on and is supported
by the walls.

The peak is made of two strips of two cards each, and slid into a base
of one strip of three cards by means of long slits. At the apex the
cards are also fastened together with long slits.

The little summer-house in Fig. 156 has each of the four sides made of
one card. The cards are fastened together by means of long slits. A
doorway opening is cut in the front wall, much in the same manner as the
windows are cut in the large house, only in this case the incision is
made directly on the lower edge of the card, and, when finished, the
lower half of the door is cut off. The door is bent outward and forms a
little canopy for the open doorway, as in the photograph.

Make the roof of two strips of cards of two cards each by merely laying
the strips across the top opening of the house.

Fasten the ends of the two cards together with long slits to form the
apex of the peak, and bend the bottom ends of the cards out flat, so the
peak will stand steady on the roof.

If the children would like to keep the buildings intact to play with at
any future time, as they build up the structures let them add a little
glue or strong paste here and there to hold the various parts firmly
together. The toys will then last a long time and stand considerable
wear.

Tissue-paper trees in spools furnish the foliage in the photograph,
while a miniature flag, with its pole supported in an empty spool, shows
the nation to which the country belongs.

Cut little paper people from cardboard and place them on the grounds.

A fine setting for the scene can be made by tacking a piece of green
canton flannel, fleecy side uppermost, taut over a pastry board, or
pinning it on a piece of the light-weight patent straw pasteboard.

The fleecy green gives the appearance of grass, and when the glistening
white buildings are set down on the grass among the trees with Old Glory
floating overhead, and gaily dressed dolls in the foreground, the
children will be delighted with the scene; nor will the appreciation be
confined to the children, for older people will also enjoy it.

[Illustration: FIG. 165--Pagoda.]


=The Pagoda=

in Fig. 165 is extremely easy to build. Make the base square of four
cards fastened together with long slits. On this foundation build up one
card on the front and one on the back, by cutting two short slits on the
lower edge of the lengthwise bottom of the cards, one slit near each
end (Fig. 166), and sliding one card across the front on the uncut top
edges of the sides of the foundation by means of the slits; then
fastening the other card across the back from side to side in like
manner. On top of these two cards build two more, reaching across the
sides from front to back. Continue building in this way until the pagoda
is ten stories high. The projections along the sides are made of two
long narrow cards each, the two cards fastened together at the centre
like Fig. 158; then the ends are bent up and the strip laid across from
side to side on the top edge of the two side cards which form every
other story. The apex roof is built of two cards with the top edges
fastened together, tent-like, by means of long slits, on a foundation
strip of two cards bent up at the ends.

[Illustration: FIG. 166--Cut one slit near each end.]


=The Furniture=

in Fig. 167 is also made of visiting cards. Take two long, narrow cards,
place them together, and about one-third the distance from one end of
the double layer cut a slit through the two cards, extending it a little
more than half-way across the cards; then take the cards apart and slide
them into each other. Be sure that the two short ends of the cards come
together. Open out the two short ends tent-fashion, and bend down one of
the long ends across its centre for the seat, leaving the other long end
erect to form the back of the chair for the paper doll (Fig. 167). Make
several chairs; then make the dressing-table. Place two long cards
evenly together and cut a slash through and more than half-way across
the centre of the two cards. Slide the cards together, making an X. Bend
out the top and bottom ends of the X flat. For the top of the table
select a rather large card, but not too wide. Cut one slash on each side
of the centre of one of the lengthwise edges. This will make three
divisions. Cut corresponding slashes, but much deeper, in one of the
short ends of a smaller card, which is to be the mirror. Trim off the
end of the middle division in the table top and slide the two cards
together, bringing the B and B divisions (Fig. 157) of the mirror well
forward, so that the top of the table extends back beyond the mirror;
then bend up the B and B divisions of the mirror, as in the photograph.
Place the top with the mirror attached on the X, allowing the X to come
back directly under the mirror in order that the top may be steady. If
you paste a piece of silver paper or tinfoil well smoothed out on the
card for the mirror, the dressing-table will, from a little distance,
appear quite realistic.

[Illustration: FIG. 167--Card furniture.]




CHAPTER XIII

PLAYING INDIANS WITH COSTUMES MADE OF NEWSPAPERS


THE best framework for a newspaper wigwam can be made of long-handled
feather dusters, but long-handled brushes, or poles of any kind you may
happen to have, will answer the purpose; all that is necessary is
something you can make into a framework similar to Fig. 168. Tie your
poles together at the top and spread them out at the base, tent-fashion.

Make the


=Covering for the Wigwam=

of six large double sheets of newspaper pasted together.

[Illustration: FIG. 168--Framework for wigwam.]

Only three poles will be needed when the covering is of newspaper, but
if you do not happen to have enough newspapers on hand for the entire
outfit of tepees and costumes, you can use a white muslin sheet for the
wigwam, in which case four poles will be needed (Fig. 169). The sheet,
not being stiff like the paper, requires more supports to make it stand
out sufficiently. Should it be inclined to fall in between the poles,
pull it out a little and lay a book over the edge which lies on the
floor, as a weight, to keep the sheet in place.

[Illustration: FIG. 169--Look at our newspaper Indian costumes. We are
playing Indians.]

If you would like the wigwam decorated in real Indian fashion, cut out
large colored paper pictures and paste them around the lower part of the
wigwam, forming a band of pictures. Be the covering either cloth or
paper, it will look well decorated, but the covering must be taken off
and the pictures pasted on. The covering should then be adjusted over
the poles. One great beauty and attraction of this newspaper Indian
material is that effective results can be produced quickly and with
little work.

Make


=Moccasins=

of newspaper, cut like the pattern (Fig. 170). For a small pair the
paper should measure fifteen inches in length and three and a half
inches in width; larger sizes require larger paper.

Fringe the central portion of the longest edge according to the fringe
lines on Fig. 170. Cut the two boundary lines of fringe, A and A, up to
the dotted line; then bend down all dotted lines. Bring the two ends
together, allowing the fringe to come on the outside, and fit the point
B over the other point B. This finishes the newspaper moccasin (Fig.
171).

[Illustration: FIG. 170--Cut moccasins this way.]

[Illustration: FIG. 171--The newspaper moccasin.]

Make


=The Little Dress Skirt=

of two newspapers pasted together along the shortest edge, then folded
lengthwise through the centre, and the two lower loose ends cut into a
deep fringe. This skirt needs no belt; it should be simply fastened
together at the back over the ordinary dress with safety-pins.

Use one sheet of paper for the little fringed sacque. Allow the paper to
remain folded along the white central band, and fold the double layers
crosswise through the centre, making four thicknesses. Cut an opening
for the head according to dotted line C (Fig. 172). Fringe the sides
along dotted line D, as shown in diagram (Fig. 172).

Unfold carefully, that the paper may not tear, and after cutting a slit
from the neck partially down the centre of the front, you will have Fig.
173. If you wish to make the garment less liable to tear, paste narrow
strips of muslin on the under side of the sacque, around the neck, down
each side of the slit, and at the head of the fringe.

[Illustration: FIG. 172--Newspaper folded ready for making little
squaw's sacque.]

[Illustration: FIG. 173--Little squaw's newspaper sacque.]

From a folded piece of newspaper cut the little squaw a head-dress (Fig.
174). Let the top of the feather come on the fold of the paper. Turn
over and crease down the straight edge of the band at the dotted line
(Fig. 174), making four layers.

[Illustration: FIG. 174--Head-dress.]

Crown the little girl with the head-dress, pinning the ends together at
the back with a safety-pin. Slip the moccasins on her feet, fastening
them to the toe of the shoe with a little stiff paste, and your
charming little squaw will be ready to play in the wigwam (Fig. 175).

Older girls can make the Indian costume from the same patterns by
cutting them larger.

The Indian boy needs a lot of fringed newspaper for his costume. Cut
folded strips to make the fringe thick and in two layers. Fold down the
solid edge of one strip and with safety-pins fasten the fold along the
outside line of the boy's trousers and stockings, as in the photograph
(Fig. 176). Trim the other trouser leg and stocking in the same manner.

[Illustration: FIG. 175--Charming little squaw.]

[Illustration: FIG. 176--Young Indian chief.]

Cut a generous strip of double-layer fringe to fasten entirely around
the boy's shoulders, extending across both back and chest. Reinforce the
top edge of the band of fringe, and along the line where the solid paper
meets the fringe, with strips of muslin, pasted on, to prevent tearing.

[Illustration: FIG. 177--Newspaper cut for chief's head-dress.]

[Illustration: FIG. 178--Separate and open out the lower lengthwise
halves of the head-dress which falls down the back.]

For the chief's


=Feather Head-Dress=

cut a folded strip of newspaper long enough to encircle the boy's head
and allow for a lap--twenty-two inches will probably be correct. Make
the strip six inches wide; the tops of the feathers must be along the
folded edge. Let the feathers be fully four inches high, and allow a
space of one inch on the band at the base of each feather, F (Fig. 177).
The widest part of each feather should be one and three-quarters inches.
Make the band four thicknesses by folding it over at the dotted line;
then crease each separate feather on the right side lengthwise, through
the centre, to stiffen them and insure their standing erect. Cut another
long strip of feathers in the same way, to fall from the head down the
back. On this strip paste the front and back of each feather together at
its base. Also paste together lengthwise the upper portion of the band,
and, instead of folding as you did the first band, separate and open out
its two lower lengthwise halves. Crease them backward away from each
other, so that the feathers may stand erect and the band be at right
angles on each side of the feathers (Fig. 178).

The open base of the band lying against the boy's back causes the
feathers to stand out and not fall flat and spoil the effect, as they
otherwise might do. The photograph of the boy chieftain standing was
taken expressly that you might see exactly how the newspaper costume of
the Indian brave should look.

[Illustration: FIG. 179--Begin rolling paper strip for calumet this
way.]

[Illustration: FIG. 180--Continue rolling the paper.]

Make the


=Calumet=

of a strip of newspaper five inches wide and about thirty-two inches
long. Hold one corner between your thumb and first finger and roll the
paper as if you were making a lighter (Fig. 179). When you have rolled
it to the opposite corner, E, remove your fingers and let the paper
unroll. Smooth out the rolled corners until it springs back into a large
roll about three-quarters of an inch in diameter (Fig. 180).

When the corner roll is the right size, continue to roll the paper until
a long round stick is formed (Fig. 181). Paste the loose end of the
stick on the roll and cut both ends off even, as indicated by the dotted
lines in Fig. 181.

[Illustration: FIG. 181--Stick of rolled paper for calumet.]

Bend the paper roll about six and a half inches from one end, and bring
the bent portion over against and on top of the roll. Pin the fold down
on the roll three inches from the bend; then turn up the open end to
form the bowl of the pipe, which you must make stand erect should it
seem inclined to lean (Fig. 182).

[Illustration: FIG. 182--Paper roll bent and pinned into a calumet.]




CHAPTER XIV

CHRISTMAS-TREE DECORATIONS


[Illustration: FIG. 183--The Christmas tree with home-made decorations.]

[Illustration: FIG. 184--The Christmas star.]

FIG. 183 is the photograph of a Christmas tree whose trimming is
entirely home-made. The brilliant colors and shining gilt of the papers
used, give a sparkle and life that are most captivating, and the
ornaments are so easily made that the children themselves can do much
toward decorating a tree in this manner.

At the top of the tree, shining above all other ornaments, is


=The Christmas Star=

(Fig. 184), and this is the way to make it:

From a piece of cardboard cut an oblong with the top and bottom edges
five and a quarter inches long and the side edges just five inches long
(Fig. 185). Now, exactly in the middle at the top edge, make a dot, A
(Fig. 185); then on each side edge make a dot, BB (Fig. 185). On the
bottom edge, one inch from each bottom corner, make the dots CC. With
the aid of a ruler draw the lines connecting these points, as shown in
Fig. 185. This gives a perfect five-pointed star, five inches high. Cut
the star out, cover its entire surface with a coat of paste, and lay
over it a smooth piece of gilt paper, pressing out the fulness and
creases. When the paste is dry, cut away the paper from the edges, and
there will remain a gilt star, firm and stiff enough to stand up
bravely.

[Illustration: FIG. 185--Draw the star like this.]

But this is not all. There are to be a number of gold-tipped rays
flaming out from the star to represent its spreading light. For these
rays select ten broom straws with two prongs. Trim the prongs evenly,
shorten the stems at the bottom, and spread the prongs apart (Fig. 186).
Now, cut twenty strips of gold paper half an inch wide and a little over
four inches long. Lay one strip down, cover the wrong side with paste,
place three broom straws with their prongs resting on the paste side of
the paper, and press another strip of gold paper over the first,
inclosing the tips of the straws. This will give a gold paper on both
sides of the straws. Then, when the paste is dry, cut away the paper,
leaving a gold triangle on the tip of each prong of each broom straw.
Fig. 187 shows one triangle cut out. Treat all of your broom-straw rays
in this way, then cover with paste the centre of the wrong side of the
star up to the points, lay two straws in place, the stems crossing, as
in Fig. 188, and over the stems press a short strip of white paper, like
D (Fig. 188), pasting it down securely. Adjust the other rays between
the points of the star, and fasten in place in the same manner.

[Illustration: FIG. 186--Place three broom straws on the paper.]

[Illustration: FIG. 187--One triangle cut out.]

[Illustration: FIG. 188--Paste the straws on the star.]

To hold the star upright, make a lighter from a strip of white
writing-paper for a stem. Flatten the top of the lighter, cut it off
evenly, and paste it on the back of the star between the two lower
points, as in Fig. 188. Over the stems of the broom straws and the end
of the lighter paste a white paper lining that will reach part way up
each point of the star. This lining should be made before the rays are
pasted to the star, by laying the star on white paper, tracing around
its edges with a pencil, cutting out the white paper star, and then
clipping off about one inch of the points. The gold star will look like
Fig. 184.

[Illustration: FIG. 189--The Christmas bells that dangle alluringly.]

Not the least effective trimmings on the tree are the little


=Christmas Bells=

that hang by strings from the tips of the branches and dangle
alluringly. They are of different sizes, and some are made of gilt,
others of colored paper (Fig. 189).

[Illustration: FIG. 190--Curve the paper into a cone.]

[Illustration: FIG. 191--Trim off the bottom points.]

[Illustration: FIG. 192--The pattern of the bells.]

For a bell three and a half inches high (a very good size), cut a strip
of paper three and a half inches wide and seven inches long, curve it
into the cone shape shown in Fig. 190, and pin together. Cut off the
point that laps over, according to the dotted line, also the point that
laps under, leaving a little over half an inch for the final lap. Trim
off the bottom points even with the shortest part of the bottom edge, as
shown by the curved, dotted line, and you will have Fig. 191. Fig. 191
opened out will give you Fig. 192, which will be the pattern for other
bells.

As Fig. 192 lies flat on the table, run the paste brush along one side
edge, making the coat of paste as wide as the lap is to be, then curve
the bell into shape. Make the bottom edges meet evenly and press the
paste-covered edge over the other side edge. Hold the finger inside the
bell while you do this, to keep it from flattening.

[Illustration: FIG. 193--Cut out two disks at one time.]

[Illustration: FIG. 194--Paste the strings between the two disks.]

[Illustration: FIG. 195--The clapper in the bell.]

The clapper is made of two round disks of gold paper with the string
pasted between them. For the bell we are now making, the clapper should
be almost one inch in diameter. Fold a piece of gilt paper and cut out
the two disks at one time (Fig. 193). Cover the wrong side of one disk
with paste, lay the end of a string across the middle (Fig. 194), and
press the other disk on top. Both sides of the clapper will then be
gilt. Hold the clapper up to the bell by the string, so that half of
the clapper is below the bottom edge of the bell; then, bringing the
string close to the point at the top of the bell, run a pin through the
string to mark the distance. Where the pin is, tie a knot, F (Fig. 194);
this is to hold the clapper in its proper position. Thread the end of
the string through the eye of a darning-needle and push the needle up
through the point of the bell--the knot will keep the string from
running up too far (Fig. 195). Allow eight or ten inches of string above
the bell, so that it may be hung high or low, as desired. A bell should
never be tied close to a branch, but should hang down far enough to sway
with every passing current of air. The long string also adds to the
decorative effect.

[Illustration: FIG. 196--The frosty snow pocket.]


=The Snow Pocket=

(Fig. 196) is another pretty ornament and is made with a few snips of
the scissors.

[Illustration: FIG. 197--Fold the paper crosswise.]

[Illustration: FIG. 198--Cut slits in the folded paper.]

Cut a strip of white tissue-paper five and a half inches wide and
twenty-two inches long. Fold the paper crosswise through the middle;
then fold it again and again until your folded piece is one inch wide.
The folds must always be across the paper from start to finish (Fig.
197). Now, cut slits in the folded paper, first a slit on one side, and
then a slit on the other, as in Fig. 198. Let the spaces between the
slits be one-eighth of an inch wide, and cut each slit to within
one-eighth of an inch of the edge. When this is done, carefully unfold
the paper and spread it out flat, then lift the top edge with one hand,
the bottom edge with the other, and gently pull the meshes apart. Gather
the top edge into little plaits, and twist them together in a point;
gather the bottom edge in the same way and twist that; then carefully
pull the snow pocket out, and you will have a long, narrow bag of soft,
white meshes. If it flares out too much, crush it together softly with
your hand. Make a small gilt paper star and fasten a narrow strip of
white tissue-paper to its top point. Open the bag, slip the star inside,
and suspend it half-way from the top by pasting the end of the paper
strip to the top of the bag. Make a loop of tissue-paper, fasten it to
the top point of the bag, and then hang the snow pocket on the tree. The
gold star gleaming through the frosty meshes is very pretty, but if you
have several snow pockets, there need not be stars in all.


=Jocko, the Monkey=

(Fig. 199) is not made of paper, but of delectable, sugary raisins. He
is a funny fellow, and will delight the children.

[Illustration: FIG. 199--Jocko.]

Thread a clean, cotton string in a large darning-needle, then select
three of your largest raisins for the body and a suitably shaped one for
the head. There must be three raisins for each leg, one for each foot,
and three for each arm. Tie a knot in the end of your string and,
beginning with one foot, string on three raisins for one leg, then the
three for the body, and, lastly, the one for the head. Tie a knot close
to the top at the head and leave a long end to the string. Thread your
needle again and string on the raisins for the other foot and leg, then
run the needle up through the lower raisin of the body, and fasten the
second string to the first between the two body raisins.

[Illustration: FIG. 200--Jocko ready to be dressed.]

[Illustration: FIG. 201--Jocko's hat.]

[Illustration: FIG. 202--Jocko's coat.]

[Illustration: FIG. 203--Jocko's skirt.]

String three raisins for one arm, run the needle through the middle of
the top body raisin, where the shoulders should be, then string on the
three raisins for the other arm and tie a knot at the end. Jocko is all
right now, except that he is very limp. Put stiffening into his joints
by running broom straws through his legs, body, and arms. Use a raisin
stem for the tail, and fasten it on by pushing the largest end into the
lowest body raisin. Make the eyes by running a short piece of broom
straw through the head, allowing the ends to stand out a short distance
in the place for the eyes. Remember a monkey's eyes are always close
together, and they must be made so in order to look natural.

At this stage Jocko will resemble Fig. 200; but he must have clothes and
a hat to give the finishing touches and make him look like the monkeys
the children are familiar with. Fig. 201 is Jocko's hat, Fig. 202 his
coat, and Fig. 203 his little skirt.

Cut all of these from bright-colored cambric of a size to fit the
monkey. Fold a piece of cambric for the coat, and cut it out as you
would for a paper doll, with the fold at the top. The skirt and hat are
circular. Cut a round hole in the middle of the skirt for the waist, and
slit it down the back. This furnishes the costume.

[Illustration: FIG. 204--Bring the corners of the square together.]

[Illustration: FIG. 205--Slit the triangle.]

[Illustration: FIG. 206--Opened out.]

Now, thread the end of the string from the top of Jocko's head into the
darning-needle and run the needle through the middle of the hat (Fig.
200); then push the hat down on his head. Fit the skirt around Jocko's
waist, and fasten it at the back with needle and thread; then put on his
jacket and fasten that in front. It is unnecessary to say that Jocko is
good to eat.


=The Chrysanthemum=

ornament is showy and pretty; it is also very quickly made. Fold through
the middle a piece of bright orange tissue-paper six inches square. This
will give you an oblong. Fold again through the middle crosswise, and
you will have a smaller square. Bring the two opposite corners of the
square together and fold like Fig. 204; then cut off the point curving
the edge, as shown by the dotted line. The folded part of the triangle
is at the diagonal in Fig. 204, the edges at the bottom. Now cut slits
in your triangle like Fig. 205. Open it, and you will have Fig. 206.
Make two fringed circles like Fig. 206, lay one on top of the other,
pinch the centre in a point, twist it, and draw the fringed ends
together (Fig. 207). Make a writing-paper lighter for the stem, cover
the point of the ornament with paste, insert it in the large end of the
lighter, and press together with your fingers until it holds tight. The
result will be like Fig. 208. In fastening the chrysanthemum ornament
on the tree, stand it upright and run a pin through the stem into one of
the small branches.

[Illustration: FIG. 207--Pinch the centre into a point.]

[Illustration: FIG. 208--The chrysanthemum ornament]

Strings of


=Colored Paper Disks=

looped from branch to branch, take the place of colored glass balls, and
add materially to the beauty of the tree.

Fig. 209 shows how these strings are made. Red, gold, yellow, orange,
green, blue, and white make pretty disks, and show off well on the tree.

[Illustration: FIG. 209--The colored paper disks.]

Cut your disks perfectly round, and in pairs; for they must be the same
on both sides, G, H (Fig. 209). You can make the disks on some strings
all of one size; on others they may graduate down to quite small ones at
the ends. When the disks are cut out, lay one down, bottom side up, H
(Fig. 209). Cover this with paste, then lay a white cotton string across
the disk, directly through the middle. Allow about six inches of the
string to extend beyond the disk, and let each string be one yard long.
Before the paste has time to dry, press the mate of the disk, G (Fig.
209), on top of H, over the string, taking care to have the edges even.
Go through this process with each disk. Paste them on the string one
inch apart, and leave six inches of string at the last end.

[Illustration: FIG. 210--A fringed ornament.]

[Illustration: FIG. 211--Six triangles like this.]

Fig. 210 is a dainty


=Fringed Ornament=

made of colored and gilt paper. The foundation is a round disk of white
writing-paper, two inches in diameter. To this is pasted the ends of a
narrow light-blue ribbon, long enough to form a loop by which to hang
the ornament. For the rest, cut two circles of light-pink tissue-paper,
six inches in diameter, fringe them on the edges to the depth of one
inch, making the fringe quite fine; then paste one circle on one side of
the foundation, the other circle on the other side. Now, from your gold
paper cut six long, narrow triangles, and cut the wide end into fringe
two inches deep (Fig. 211). Paste these tufts of gold fringe at equal
distances on the pink circle, making the points meet at the centre. Make
a smaller, light-blue, fringed circle, and a still smaller pink circle.
Paste the centre of the blue circle over the centre of the gold fringe,
and the centre of the small pink circle over the centre of the blue. Cut
out a small, eight-pointed gold star and paste directly in the middle of
the pink circle. You can vary this kind of ornament in a number of ways.
Fig. 212 shows another made on the same principle.

[Illustration: FIG. 212--Another ornament.]

The crowning glory of every Christmas tree is its


=Candles=

and, whether lighted or not, they are always prominently in evidence. Of
late years the people have grown wise in the matter of fires, and many
parents refuse to light the Christmas candles on their children's tree
because of the great danger of conflagration.

[Illustration: FIG. 213--Little paper candles.]

Fig. 213 shows some paper candles on an evergreen branch, standing
upright and burning briskly. The candles may be made of white as well as
colored paper. Make an oblong, K (Fig. 214), four inches long and two
and a half inches wide, the wick one-quarter of an inch high, and the
back of the flame, L, three-quarters of an inch long. From
orange-colored tissue-paper cut the flame (Fig. 215). This should be a
little over a half an inch wide at the base and two inches long. Lay an
oblong on the table in front of you; take a large-sized pencil; place
it on the long edge farthest away from the flame, and roll it on the
pencil (Fig. 216) until the opposite edge overlaps the roll. Then run
the paste brush along the edge and paste it down. Your candle is now a
hollow roll. Slip the roll off the pencil and cut two slim notches
opposite to each other, in the bottom edge (Fig. 217). Make the notches
on some of the candles at the front and back, on others at each side.
This is so that the flames may always face outward, though the branches
that hold the candles may turn in various directions. Lastly, paste the
flame on the back of the flame, allowing the tip to flare out at one
side as though stirred by a current of air (Fig. 217).

[Illustration: FIG. 214--Begin the candle in this way.]

[Illustration: FIG. 215--The flame is cut like this.]

[Illustration: FIG. 216--Roll it on a pencil.]

[Illustration: FIG. 217--The finished candle.]

In placing the candles, stand them up astride the branches by means of
the notches at the bottom, turning the right side of the flame always
toward the room. The tiniest twigs will hold these paper candles easily,
and when the needles of the fir interfere with their adjustment, pull
off some of the needles and set the candles astride the bare places on
the branches.

Finish the tree by throwing over it a web of long, very narrow strips of
white and orange-colored tissue-paper.

The narrower the strips the better they will look.

It hardly seems necessary to offer a word of caution, but it will do no
harm to say that the flame of gas, candle, or fire, should not come near
this paper-decked tree, though it is scarcely more inflammable than a
tree trimmed with tinsel.




CHAPTER XV

A HOME-MADE SANTA CLAUS


"MERRY CHRISTMAS! Merry Christmas!" calls out Santa Claus cheerily as
the guests come trooping into the room.

Laughing and joking, his eyes twinkling with fun, Santa Claus names each
person as he hands out the gifts from his fat Christmas bag and from the
generous pile at his feet. All this merriment happens at Christmastide
when you play the part of good "Kris Kringle" in your own home, in the
schoolroom, the Sunday-school, or in any place where Christmas is
celebrated and where children are gathered to enjoy the festivities.

Take a good long look at Santa Claus, as shown in the picture (Fig.
218); then turn your eyes to the illustration (Fig. 219). Can you
believe it possible that the two photographs are of the same person in
identically the same pose? Such is truly the case. The second gives the
woman's back, while the first shows her face, arms, and hands
transformed into those of the jolly saint.

You can see at a glance how very easy it will be for you to have a real,
live, little Santa Claus for your Christmas.

Any one--grandfather, grandmother, father, mother, big sister or
brother, or you yourself--can assume the character of this live little
saint, can grow suddenly short of stature, jolly and fat, be arrayed in
scarlet, ermine-trimmed, and crowned with a red-peaked hat, all in less
time than it takes to tell it; and, stranger still, the transformation
may be accomplished in a very comfortable way, without even the bother
of changing the usual attire.

It is essential merely to paste on the face tufts of raw cotton for
eyebrows, mustache and goatee, and to slip over each arm an extra
sleeve. This accomplished, and the proper position taken behind the
curtain, lo, "magic change"! There you are as fine a little Santa Claus
as any one would care to see, and your best friend would not recognize
you, so complete is the change. Disguise your voice and no one can find
you out, not even your nearest relative.

[Illustration: FIG. 218--Santa Claus as the spectators see him.]

[Illustration: FIG. 219--The real Santa Claus behind the curtain.]

When the gifts have been distributed and you are ready to go out among
the excited children or family circle again, step from the curtain, pull
off the extra sleeves, remove the cotton from your face, and in a
moment's time you will again be your own natural self.

When preparing this entertainment you will find the demand on your purse
very slight, the principal outlay being for the curtain. Purchase
moss-green lining cambric, at four, five, or six cents a yard, to
stretch over the doorway you intend to use. Two yards and a quarter cut
in one full breadth and one half breadth, when sewed together into a
curtain, will be enough for an ordinary doorway. Doorways vary in size,
however, and it is best to take the measurements of yours before buying
the material. The space between the folding doors will probably call for
five yards of cambric. When the strips of cloth are sewed together,
stretch the curtain taut over the opening, tacking it at long intervals
on the topmost level of the wood-work over the door and on the extreme
edge of the door jamb next to the wall. If fastened in this manner,
tacks will not injure the wood-work.

[Illustration: FIG. 220--Holes in curtain for face and arms.]

[Illustration: FIG. 221--Cap and body of coat pinned on curtain.]

[Illustration: FIG. 222--Pattern for sleeve-cap.]

[Illustration: FIG. 223--Santa Claus's paste board boot top.]

Stand on the floor facing the centre of the curtain and mark the place
where your face comes; then where your arms will most easily pass
through the curtain. Cut holes in the cloth, one for your face with chin
entirely through, and two for your arms (Fig. 220). Cut the holes small;
they can be enlarged if necessary.

Make Santa Claus's cap of a piece of scarlet cambric twelve inches wide
and seventeen inches long; tie one end with a string into a tassel;
then pin the cap on top of the face opening (Fig. 221), and cut the
lower edge into a curve to fit the hole as indicated by the dotted lines
in Fig. 221. One width of scarlet cambric twenty-six inches long, used
just as it comes, will make the jacket.

Draw in one edge of the coat to meet the inner edge of the armhole and
pin it there; do the same with the other side, and you will have fulness
in front to allow for padding. Bring the sides around the armhole
outward again and pin in place; then fold up a wide hem and pin the
sides of the jacket to the curtain and fill out the inside of the jacket
with half sheets of newspaper lightly crumpled (Fig. 221).

Pin enough paper to the curtain under the coat to give the body of Santa
Claus a decidedly rounded appearance; be sure that the padding is
securely fastened to the curtain. Then pin the sleeve caps, cut
according to Fig. 222, around the outer edge of the armhole. Pin raw
white cotton around the face opening to form the hair and long, full
beard. Allow the cotton to come well over the edge of the hole, that it
may lie naturally on Santa Claus's face.

With ink, mark the fleecy side of the strips of white canton flannel to
resemble white ermine. Notice particularly the shape of the black ermine
dots and have yours like them. Pin one ermine strip down the front of
the red jacket and another across the bottom edge. Make two long,
separate scarlet sleeves, unhemmed at top and bottom, and pin a band of
ermine around each for a cuff. The only necessary sewing for the entire
costume is the seams of the sleeves.

[Illustration: FIG. 224--Santa Claus's costume ready for the
impersonator.]

Polish up a pair of ordinary old shoes, stuff them out with newspapers,
and use them for Santa Claus's feet. Roll two pieces of cardboard, or
pieces of limber pasteboard boxes, into cylinders; ink or blacken them.
When dry, cut a curve in one end of each, like Fig. 223, and fit these
tops over the stuffed shoes to make them into boots. Set the boots on a
bench or a low table, placed across in front of Santa Claus, and
adjust them under the coat, so the little fellow will appear to be
standing on the bench (Fig. 224). Pin Christmas greens, either natural
or of tissue-paper, over the top and down the sides of the curtain, and
you will have a unique, very effective, and novel arrangement for
Christmas, easy to make, and costing but a trifle. Try it.




CHAPTER XVI

NATURE STUDY WITH TISSUE-PAPER


A NATURAL flower, some tissue-paper, a pair of scissors, a spool of
thread, and nimble fingers are all you need.

There are no patterns, only circles and squares and strips of paper
which you gather here, spread out there, wrap and tie somewhere else,
and, with deft fingers, model into almost exact reproductions of the
natural flower before you.

With its unfamiliar terms to be committed to memory and the many parts
of the flower to be distinguished, botany is apt to prove dry and
tiresome to the little child, but to study nature by copying the flowers
in this marvellously adaptable material is only a beautiful game which
every child, and indeed many grown people, will delight in. The form of
the flower, its name and color, may, by this means, be indelibly stamped
upon the memory, and a good foundation laid for further study.


=The Best Models=

Ordinary garden flowers and those most easily procured make the best
models. The carnation, the morning-glory, and the rarer blossoms of the
hibiscus are well adapted to the work, also the daffodil and some of the
wonderful orchids.

Even holly, with its sharp-spiked leaves and scarlet berries, and the
white-berried, pale green mistletoe may be closely copied. All these and
many more are made on the same principle, and in so simple a manner
that even quite a little child may succeed in producing very good copies
from nature.


=Material=

Buy a sheet of light pink tissue-paper, another of darker pink, and one
of the darkest red you can find; then a sheet of light yellow-green and
one of dark green. Have a table "cleared for the action" and place your
paper on the right-hand side, adding a pair of scissors and a spool of
coarse thread, or, better still, of soft darning cotton.

With all this you are to copy the


=Carnation=

which some one has given you or you have growing in your own garden.
Make one of your light pink paper, one of the darker pink, and another
of the rich, deep red to have a variety (Fig. 225).

[Illustration: FIG. 225--Carnations modelled from tissue-paper.]

Lay your natural flower down on the left-hand side of the table, away
from your material, but within quite easy reach, for it must be
consulted frequently. Seat yourself comfortably and don't work
hurriedly.

The first thing necessary in this system of squares and circles is to
know


=How to Cut a Circle Quickly=

easily, and accurately, and always without a pattern. Here is a method
which never fails:

[Illustration: FIG. 226--Fold the square diagonally through the centre.]

[Illustration: FIG. 227--The folded square makes the triangle.]

Cut a square the size you wish to make your circle. That is, if you want
a circle with a diameter of four inches, cut a four-inch square (Fig.
226). Fold the square diagonally through the centre according to the
dotted line on Fig. 226, and you have a triangle (Fig. 227). Fold this
at the dotted line and it will make another triangle (Fig. 228). Again
fold through the middle and you have the third triangle (Fig. 229). Fold
once more and Fig. 230 is the result. Measure the distance from the
edge, B, to the centre, A, in Fig. 230, and mark the same distance on
the other side of the triangle shown by the dot, C (Fig. 231). With your
scissors cut across from C to B, curving the edge slightly, as shown by
the dotted line from C to B (Fig. 231). Fig. 232 is the circle still in
its folds. Fig. 233 is the circle opened, the dotted line indicating
where it has been folded.

[Illustration: FIG. 228--The second triangle.]

[Illustration: FIG. 229--The third triangle.]

[Illustration: FIG. 230--The fourth triangle.]

[Illustration: FIG. 231--Cut along dotted line.]

[Illustration: FIG. 232--The folded circle.]

[Illustration: FIG. 233--The circle opened.]

Your eye will soon become sufficiently accurate to enable you to gauge
the distance from A to B, and you can then cut from C to B without
measuring.


=Before Beginning Your Flower=

take up the natural one and examine it carefully. You will notice that
it has a great many petals crowded closely together, and that their
edges are pointed like a saw. You will also see that the calyx is
wrapped snugly around the lower part of the flower, and that it, too,
has a pointed edge.

Now hold the pink off at arm's length. The separateness of the petals
disappears and you see them only as a mass; the points on the edges are
not noticeable except as they give the flower a crimped appearance, and
the edge of the calyx looks almost straight. It is this appearance or
the impression of the flower that you are to produce rather than its
many and little separate parts. So now set to work.


=Cut Two Squares for Each Pink=

one measuring five and a quarter inches, the other four and
three-quarters inches, and turn them into circles (Fig. 233), by the
method just explained. Take one of the circles at the centre, where the
folding lines cross, with the tips of the fingers of your left hand, and
pinch it together; then, while still holding it, crimp the edge with the
fingers of your right hand (Fig. 234). Do this always with every kind of
flower, whether it be made of circles or squares. Without loosening your
hold of the centre, draw the paper lightly through your right hand
several times, then crimp the edge again, this time with the blade of
the scissors. Treat all the circles alike, then place a small circle
inside a larger one and draw them through your hand to bring them close
together, pinching them closely until within a little over an inch of
the edge (Fig. 235). Make a slender lighter of ordinary writing-paper
(Fig. 236), snip off the point of the flower, D, in Fig. 235, open the
other end a little, and push the lighter through until its head is
hidden. This forms the stem. Wrap and tie with thread at the bottom of
the flower (Fig. 237), and again where the petals spread. This last is
to be but temporary, as you will remove the thread when the flower is
sufficiently pressed together to hold its shape.

[Illustration: FIG. 234--Crimp the edge with your fingers.]

[Illustration: FIG. 235--Draw these through your hand to bring them
closely together.]

[Illustration: FIG. 236--Make the stem of a paper lighter.]

From your light green paper cut a circle measuring three and a quarter
inches through its diameter and cut it in two to make the half circle
for the calyx (Fig. 238). Remove the thread that holds the flower just
below its petals and wrap the calyx closely around the lower part, tying
it at the bottom; then cut a narrow strip of dark green paper and wrap
it spirally around the stem, beginning at the top (Fig. 239). Let the
wrapper extend a little below the lighter and twist the end to hold it
in place. Spread the petals of your flower as much like the natural
blossom as possible.

[Illustration: FIG. 237--Tie the flower to the stem.]

[Illustration: FIG. 238--The calyx.]

[Illustration: FIG. 239--Wrap the paper spirally around the stem.]

[Illustration: FIG. 240--The leaves.]

[Illustration: FIG. 241--Twist each end into a point.]


=Leaves=

For the leaves cut a strip of dark green paper six inches long and
three-quarters of an inch wide (Fig. 240). Find the centre by folding
the paper end to end and making the crease shown by the dotted line in
Fig. 240. Gather it along this line, not with needle and thread--we use
no needle in this work--but with your fingers, and pinch it together;
then twist each end into a point (Fig. 241). With the sharp end of your
scissors punch a hole directly through the centre, E (Fig. 241), and
push the point of the stem through the hole, bringing the leaves as far
up on the stem as you find them on the natural flower; then wrap and tie
them in place.

[Illustration: FIG. 242--Make the bud of a circle.]

[Illustration: FIG. 243--Slip the bag over the head of the lighter.]


=The Bud=

is made of a circle of dark green paper the diameter of which is three
and a quarter inches (Fig. 242). Gather this circle between your fingers
as you did the others and crimp the edge with the scissors. It will then
form a little bag or cup like Fig. 242. Slip the bag over the head of
the lighter and tie at the bottom, as in Fig. 243. If the bud does not
take the proper shape at first, model it with your fingers until it is
correct. Start the wrapping of the stem just above where the bud is tied
and finish as you did the stem of the pink. Use small leaves on the bud
stem, having the strip of paper just as wide, but considerably shorter
than for the leaves on the stem of the open flower.

It is wonderful how very natural these blossoms appear. At a short
distance no one would think they are not the real, old and familiar
pinks. Only the fragrance is missing, and that may also be supplied and
a spicy odor given by inclosing a whole clove in the heart of each
flower.

[Illustration: FIG. 244--Morning-glory modelled from tissue-paper.]


=The Morning-Glory=

From the pale pink paper you can make a delicately beautiful
morning-glory (Fig. 244). Have the natural flower with its stem and
leaves to copy from, even if the blossom is not the color you want. As
with the pink, it is the general form and appearance we strive for in
the morning-glory, not the detail.

Make your pink circles with a diameter of about seven inches. It is
always better to have your flowers a trifle larger than the natural
ones, rather than smaller.

[Illustration: FIG. 245--Flatten out the top.]

But one circle is required for each morning-glory. Crimp this in your
fingers and draw through your hand as you did the circles for the pinks;
then, pinching it together to within one and a half inches of the edge,
hold it in your left hand and flatten out the top, as in Fig. 245. See
that the fulness is evenly distributed, and pull and straighten out the
edges until you are satisfied with its appearance.

A piece of bonnet-wire makes the best stem if you wish to give the true
viny effect of the growth. If it is only the blossom you are making, a
paper lighter will answer. When you use the wire, bend one end over to
form a small loop; this is to keep the stem from slipping through the
flower. Pass the straight end of the wire through the centre of the
flower and draw it down until the loop is hidden.

[Illustration: FIG. 246--Green square for calyx.]

[Illustration: FIG. 247--Hold the square at the centre.]

Make


=The Calyx=

of a square of light green paper measuring about four and a half inches.
Fold the square four times through the centre to form the creases shown
by the dotted lines in Fig. 246. Hold the square at the centre and draw
the edges down as in Fig. 247; then bring the two edges together in
gathers, just below one of the corners, to form a leaf-shaped point,
as in Fig. 248. Gather below each corner, tie as in Fig. 249, and twist
each corner into a sharp point like F (Fig. 249). Draw the calyx through
your hand, bringing the points together (Fig. 250). Push the calyx up on
the stem and tie just at the base of the flower, then tie again about
three-quarters of an inch below and wrap the remainder of the calyx
close to the stem. Wind the stem with light green tissue-paper and bend
it as the natural one is bent and curved.

[Illustration: FIG. 248--Form a leaf-shaped point.]

[Illustration: FIG. 249--Twist each corner into a point.]

[Illustration: FIG. 250--Bring the points together.]

[Illustration: FIG. 251--Gather along one of the creases.]

Make several buds of the pink paper, following the directions given for
the green bud of the pink; then twist each bud at the point and add a
calyx.

[Illustration: FIG. 252--The morning-glory leaves.]

The wilted flower shown in the illustration is made by taking one of the
morning-glories you have just finished and actually wilting it by
drawing the flower together and creasing and pressing it to resemble the
partially closed and drooping natural blossom.

Only a piece of dark green paper six inches square is required to model
two almost perfectly shaped morning-glory leaves.

Fold the square twice diagonally across from corner to corner to find
its centre; then begin at one corner and gather along one of the creases
until you reach the centre (Fig. 251). Start again at the opposite
corner, gather along the crease to the centre, then wrap and tie (Fig.
252). Pinch each leaf from underneath along the crease in the middle, to
give the depression at the midrib. Straighten the leaf out a little at
its widest part and you will find you have a pair of leaves which are
surprisingly natural. Wrap and tie these to the stem and make as many
more as you think are needed.


       *       *       *       *       *

Produced by David Widger





A LECTURE ON HEADS

By Geo. Alex. Stevens

WITH ADDITIONS,

By Mr. Pilon

AS DELIVERED by Mr. Charles Lee Lewes.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, AN ESSAY ON SATIRE.

WITH FORTY-SEVEN HEADS By Nesbit, From Designs By Thurston.

1812.


[Transcriber's Note: Numbers in the text within curly brackets are page
numbers.]


ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC.

There having been several pirated editions published of this Lecture,
it is necessary to describe their nature, and to explain the manner in
which they were obtained; from which the public will judge, how much
they have been imposed upon by the different publishers.

When the Lecture was first exhibited, a very paltry abridgment was
published by a bookseller in the city. This edition was so different
from the original delivered by Mr. Stevens, that he thought it too
contemptible to affect his interest, which alone prevented him from
commencing any legal process against the {VI}publisher for thus
trespassing on his right and property.

Mr. Stevens, having exhibited his Lecture with most extraordinary
success in London, afterwards delivered it, with a continuance of that
success, in almost every principal town in England and Ireland. During
this itinerant stage of its exhibition, it had received great additions
and improvements from the hints and suggestions of Churchill, Howard,
Shuter, and many other wits, satirists, and humourists, of that day. It
therefore re-appeared again in London almost a new performance. This,
I suppose, induced another bookseller in the Strand to publish his
edition, with notes, written by a Reverend Gentleman: however this might
be, Mr. Stevens obtained an injunction against the continuance of
that publication; he was dissuaded from proceeding to trial by the
interposition of friends, who persuaded the litigants, over a bottle,
to terminate their difference; Mr. Stevens withdrew his action, and
the publication was suppressed. I relate this circumstance from {VII}the
authority of Mr. Stevens himself. The public will, no doubt, be
surprised to find that this Lecture should ever have been pirated, by
one who is now complaining of a similar act against himself. I am no
advocate for any infringements of right or property; but I cannot avoid
thinking, that complaints of this nature come with a very ill grace
from those who have committed the same species of literary depredations
themselves. The last piratical publication of this Lecture was by a
stationer in Paternoster-Row, who has had the assurance to use my name
without having my authority, or even asking my permission. He likewise
very falsely and impudently asserts, that he has published it as I
spoke it at Covent-Garden theatre. It is so much the contrary, that
it contains not a syllable of the new matter with which it was then
augmented. With respect to the rest, it is taken from the spurious and
very imperfect abridgment first mentioned in this piratical list. It is,
therefore, evident, that the original Lecture was never before published
until this opportunity {VIII}which I have taken of thus submitting it to
the Public, for their approbation and patronage, whose

Most humble and devoted servant

I am,

CHARLES LEE LEWES.

July 22, 1785.




PROLOGUE,

Written By Mr. Pilon Spoken At The Theatre Royal, Covent-Garden, June
24, 1780.

     All's safe here, I find, though the rabble rout
     A few doors lower burnt the quorum out.
     Sad times, when Bow-street is the scene of riot,
     And justice cannot keep the parish quiet.
     But peace returning, like the dove appears,
     And this association stills my fears;
     Humour and wit the frolic wing may spread,
     And we give harmless Lectures on the Head.
     Watchmen in sleep may be as snug as foxes,
     And snore away the hours within their boxes;
     Nor more affright the neighbourhood with warning,
     Of past twelve o'clock, a troublesome morning.
     Mynheer demanded, at the general shock,
     "Is the Bank safe, or has it lower'd the stock?"
     "Begar," a Frenchman cried, "the Bank we'll rob,
     "For I have got the purse to bribe the mob."--
     "Hoot awa, mon!" the loyal Scot replies,
     "You'll lose your money, for we'll hong the spies:
     "Fra justice now, my lad, ye shanna budge,
     "Tho' ye've attack'd the justice and the judge."--
     "Oh! hold him fast," says Paddy, "for I'll swear
     "I saw the iron rails in Bloomsbury-square
     "Burnt down to the ground, and heard the mob say,
     "They'd burn down the Thames the very next day."
     Tumult and riot thus on every side
     Swept off fair order like the raging tide;
     Law was no more, for, as the throng rush'd by,
     "Woe to my Lord Chief Justice!" was the cry.
     And he, rever'd by every muse so long,
     Whom tuneful Pope immortaliz'd in song,
     Than whom bright genius boasts no higher name,
     Ev'n he could find no sanctuary in fame;
     With brutal rage the Vandals all conspire,
     And rolls of science in one blaze expire.
     But England, like the lion, grows more fierce
     As dangers multiply, and foes increase;
     Her gen'rous sons, with Roman ardour warm,
     In martial bands to shield their country arm,
     And when we trembled for the city's fate,
     Her youth stood forth the champions of the state;
     Like brothers, leagu'd by nature's holy tie,
     A parent land to save, or bravely die.
     Did Britons thus, like brothers, always join,
     In vain to crush them would the world combine;
     Discord domestic would no more be known,
     And brothers learn affection from the throne.
     But know your Lecturer's awful hour is come
     When you must bid him live, or seal his doom!
     He knows 'tis hard a leader's post to fill
     Of fame superior, and more ripen'd skill.
     The blame will all be mine, if troops should fail,
     Who'd lose their heads, but never could turn tail
     Who no commander ever disobey'd,
     Or overlook'd the signals which he made.
     Under your auspices the field I take,
     For a young general some allowance make;
     But if disgracefully my army's led,
     Let this court-martial then cashier my head.


ADDITIONAL LINES TO THE PROLOGUE,

Spoken At Newbury,

In Consequence Of Lady Craven Bespeaking The Lecture,

     Who Had Published
     Some Lines On Dreaming
     She Saw Her Heart At Her Feet.

     Written By Mr. Pratt.

     'MIDST scenes like these, for so her lines impart,
     The Queen of Benham lost that gem her heart;
     Scar'd by the din, her bosom treasure flew,
     And with it every grace and muse withdrew.
     But far, or long, the wanderer could not roam,
     For wit and taste soon brought the truant home!
     One tuneful sonnet at her feet it sung,
     Then to her breast, its snowy mansion, sprung;
     Thither it went, the virtues in its train,
     To hail the panting blessing back again.
     On its fair throne it now appears as Queen,
     And sheds its lustre o'er this humble scene;
     Its radiant sceptre deigns o'er me to spread
     The genial beams which fancy feign'd were fled.
     Ah, no! her gentle heart this night is here;
     Where'er 'tis wanted-you will find it there:
     In vain the Muse shall fix it on the floor,
     It knocks this ev'ning at the Lecturer's door,
     And smiles, with him, that riot is no more.




LECTURE ON HEADS.




PART I.

{1}Every single speaker, who, like me, attempts to entertain an
audience, has not only the censure of that assembly to dread, but also
every part of his own behaviour to fear. The smallest error of voice,
judgment, or delivery, will be noted: "All that can be presumed upon in
his favour is, _a hope_ that he may meet with that indulgence which
an English audience are so remarkable _for_, and that every exhibition
stands so much in need _of_."

This method of lecturing is a very ancient custom; Juno, the wife of
Jupiter, being the first who gave her husband a lecture, and, from the
place wherein that oration was supposed to have been delivered, they
have always, since that time, been called _curtain lectures_.

{2}But, before I pretend to make free with other people's heads, it may
be proper to say something upon my own, if upon my own any thing could
be said to the purpose; but, after many experiments, finding I could not
make any thing of my own, I have taken the liberty to try what I could
do by exhibiting a Collection of Heads belonging to other people. But
here is a head [shews Stevens''s head] I confess I have more than once
wished on my own shoulders: but I fear my poor abilities will bring
a blush into its cheeks. In this head Genius erected a temple to
Originality, where Fancy and Observation resided; and from their union
sprang this numerous and whimsical progeny. This is the head of George
Alexander Stevens, long known and long respected; a man universally
acknowledged of infinite wit and most excellent fancy; one who gave
peculiar grace to the jest, and could set the table in a roar with
flashes of merriment: but wit and humour were not his only excellencies;
he possessed a keenness of satire, that made Folly hide her head in the
highest places, and Vice tremble in the bosoms of the great: but now,
blessed with that affluence which genius and prudence are sure to
acquire in England, the liberal patroness of the fine arts, he now
enjoys that ease his talents {3}have earned, whilst Fame, like an
evening sun, gilds the winter of his life with mild, but cheerful beams.
With respect, but honest ambition, I have undertaken to fill his place,
and hope my attention and zeal to please, will speak in behalf of
conscious inferiority.

A HEAD, to speak in the gardener's style, is a mere _bulbous
excrescence_, growing out from between the shoulders like a wen; it is
supposed to be a mere expletive, just to wear a hat on, to fill up the
hollow of a wig, to take snuff with, or have your hair dressed upon.

Some of these heads are manufactured in _wood_, some in _pasteboard_;
which is a hint to shew there may not only be _block-heads_, but also
_paper-skulls_.

{4}Physicians acquaint us that, upon any fright or alarm, the spirits
fly up into the _head_, and the blood rushes violently back to the
_heart_. Hence it is, politicians compare the human constitution and
the nation's constitution together: they supposing the head to be the
_court_ end of the town, and the heart the _country_; for people in the
country seem to be taking things to heart, and people at court seem to
wish to be at the head of things.

We make a mighty bustle about the twenty-four letters; how many changes
they can ring, and how many volumes they have composed; yet, let us look
upon the many millions of mankind, and see if any two faces are alike.
Nature never designed several faces which we see; it is the odd exercise
they give the muscles belonging to their visages occasions such looks:
as, for example; we meet in the streets with several people talking to
themselves, and seem much pleased with such conversation. [_Here take
them off._] Some people we see staring at every thing, and wondering
with a foolish face of praise, [_make a face here_]; some laughing,
some crying. Now crying and laughing are contrary effects, the least
alteration of features occasions the difference; it is turning _up_ the
muscles to laugh [_do so here_], and _down_ to cry.

{5}Yet laughter is much mistook, no person being capable of laughing,
who is incapable of thinking. For some people suddenly break out into
violent spasms, ha, ha, ha! and then without any gradation, change
at once into downright stupidity; as for example-[_Here shews the
example._]

In speaking about faces, we shall now exhibit a bold face. [_Shews the
head. _]

This is Sir Whisky Whiffle. He is one of those mincing, tittering,
tip-toe, tripping animalculae of the times, that flutter about fine women
like flies in a flower garden; as harmless, and as constant as their
shadows, they dangle by the side of beauty like part of their watch
equipage, as glittering, as light, and as useless; and the ladies suffer
{6}such things about them, as they wear soufflee gauze, not as things of
value, but merely to make a shew with: they never say any thing to the
purpose; but with this in their hands [_takes up an eye-glass_] they
stare at ladies, as if they were a jury of astronomers, executing a writ
of inquiry upon some beautiful planet: they imagine themselves possessed
of the power of a rattle-snake, who can, as it is said, fascinate by a
look; and that every fine woman must, at first sight, fall into their
arms.--"Ha! who's that, Jack? she's a devilish fine woman, 'pon honour,
an immensely lovely creature; who is she? She must be one of us; she
must be comeatable, 'pon honour."--"No, Sir," replies a stranger, that
overheard him, "she's a lady of strict virtue."--"Is she so? I'll look
at her again--ay, ay, she may be a lady of strict virtue, for, now I
look at her again, there is something devilish un-genteel about her."

{7}_Wigs_, as well as _books_, are furniture for the head, and both
_wigs_ and _books_ are sometimes equally voluminous. We may therefore
suppose this wig [_shews a large wig_] to be a huge quarto in large
paper; this is a duodecimo in small print [_takes the knowing head_];
and this a jockey's head, sweated down to ride a sweepstakes. [_Takes
the jockey's head._] Now a jockey's head and a horse's head have great
affinity, for the jockey's head can pull the horse's head on which side
of the post the rider pleases: but what sort of heads must those people
have who know such things are done, and will trust such sinking
funds with their capitals? These are a couple of heads which, in the
{8}Sportsman's Calendar, are called a brace of knowing ones; and, as a
great many people about London affect to be thought knowing ones, they
dress themselves in these fashions, as if it could add to the dignity
of ahead, to shew they have taken their degrees from students in the
stable, up to the masters of arts, upon a coach-box. [_ Gives the two
heads off, and takes the book-case._]

The phrase of wooden-heads is no longer paradoxical; some people set up
wooden studies, cabinet-makers become book-makers, and a man may shew a
parade of much reading, by only the assistance of a timber-merchant. A
student in the temple may be furnished with a collection of law
books cut from a _whipping-post_; physical dictionaries may be had in
_Jesuits' bark_; a treatise upon duels in _touchwood_; the history
of opposition in _wormwood_; Shakespeare's works in _cedar_, his
commentators in _rotten wood_; the reviewers in birch, and the history
of England in _heart of oak_.

Mankind now make use of substitutes in more things than book-making and
militia-men: some husbands are apt to substitute inferior women to their
own ladies, like the idiot, who exchanged a brilliant for a piece
of broken looking-glass; of such husbands we can only say, they have
{9}borrowed their education from these libraries, and have wooden, very
wooden tastes indeed. [_ Gives it off._]

Here's a head full charged for _fun_ [_takes the head_], a comical
half-foolish face, what a great many upon the stage can put on, and what
a great many people, not upon the stage, can't put off. This man always
laughed at what he said himself, and he imagined a man of wit must
always be upon the broad grin; and whenever he was in company he was
always teasing some one to be merry, saying, "Now you, muster what do
you call 'im? do now say something to make us all laugh; come, do now
be comical a little." But if there is no {10}other person will speak, he
will threaten to "tell you a story to make you die with laughing," and
he will assure you, "it is the most bestest and most comicallest story
that ever you heard in all your born days;" and he always interlards
his narration with "so as I was a saying, says I, and so as he was
a saying, says he; so says he to me, and I to him, and he to me
again;----did you ever hear any thing more comical in all your born
days?" But after he has concluded his narration, not finding any person
even to smile at what he said, struck with the disappointment, he puts
on a sad face himself, and, looking round upon the company, he says,
"It was a good story when I heard it too: why then so, and so, and so,
that's all, that's all, gentlemen." [_Puts on a foolish look, and gives
the head off._]

{11}Here is Master Jacky [_takes the head_], mamma's darling; when she
was with child of him she dreamt she was brought to bed of a pincushion.
He was never suffered to look into a book for fear of making him
round-shouldered, yet was an immense scholar for all that; his mamma's
woman had taught him all Hoyle by heart, and he could calculate to a
single tea-spoonful how much cream should be put into a codlin tart. He
wears a piece of lace which seems purloined from a lady's tucker, and
placed here, to shew that such beings as these can make no other use
of ladies' favours than to expose them. Horace had certainly such a
character in view by his _dulcissime rerum_--"sweetest of all things;"
all essence and effeminacy; {12}and that line of his--_Quid Agis,
dulcissime rerum?_ may be rendered, "What ails you, master Jacky?" As
they have rivalled the ladies in the delicacy of their complexion, the
ladies therefore have a right to make reprisals, and to take up that
manliness which our sex seems to have cast off.

Here is a Lady in her fashionable uniform. [_Takes up the head._] She
looks as if marching at the head of a battalion, or else up before day
to follow the hounds with spirit; while this lies in bed all the
morning, with his hands wrapped up in chicken gloves, his complexion
covered with milk of roses, essence of May-dew, and lily of the valley
water. This does honour to creation; this {13}disgraces it. And so far
have these things femalized themselves, by effeminate affections, that,
if a lady's cap was put on this head, Master Jacky might be taken for
Miss Jenny [_puts a lady's cap on the head of Master Jacky_]; therefore
grammarians can neither rank them as _masculine_ or _feminine_, so set
them down of the _doubtful_ gender. [_Puts off the heads._]

Among the multitude of odd characters with which this kingdom abounds,
some are called generous fellows, some honest fellows, and some devilish
clever fellows. Now the generous fellow is treat-master; the
honest fellow is toast-master; and the devilish clever fellow he is
singing-master, who is to keep the company alive for four or five hours;
then your honest fellow is to drink them all dead afterwards. They
married into Folly's family, from whom they received this crest, and
which nobody chooses to be known by. [_ Takes up the fool's cap._]

{14}This Fool's Cap is the greatest wanderer known; it never comes
home to any body, and is often observed to belong to every body but
themselves. It is odd, but the word nobody, and the term nothing,
although no certain ideas can be affixed to them, are often made such
use of in conversation. Philosophers have declared they knew nothing,
and it is common for us to talk about doing nothing; for, from ten to
twenty we go to school to be taught what from twenty to thirty we are
very apt to forget; from thirty to forty we begin to settle; from forty
to fifty we think away as fast as we can; from fifty to sixty we are
very careful in our accounts; and from sixty to seventy we cast up what
all our thinking comes to; and then, {15}what between our losses and our
gains, our enjoyments and our inquietudes, even with the addition of
old age, we can but strike this balance [_Takes the board with
cyphers_]--These are a number of nothings, they are hieroglyphics of
part of human kind; for in life, as well as in arithmetic, there are
a number of nothings, which, like these cyphers, mean nothing in
themselves, and are totally insignificant; but, by the addition of a
single figure at their head, they assume rank and value in an instant.
The meaning of which is, that nothing may be turned into something by
the single power of any one who is lord of a golden manor. [_Turns the
board, shews the golden one._] But, as these persons' gains come from
nothing, we may suppose they will come to nothing; and happy are they
who, amidst the variations of nothing, have nothing to fear: if they
have nothing to lose, they have nothing to lament; and, if they have
done nothing to be ashamed of, they have every thing to hope for. Thus
concludes the dissertation upon nothing, which the exhibitor hopes he
has properly executed, by making nothing of it.

{16}This is the head of a London Blood, taken from the life. [_Holds the
head up._] He wears a bull's forehead for a fore-top, in commemoration
of that great blood of antiquity, called Jupiter, who turned himself
into a bull to run away with Europa: and to this day bloods are
very fond of making beasts of themselves. He imagined that all mirth
consisted in doing mischief, therefore he would throw a waiter out of
the window, and bid him to be put into the reckoning, toss a beggar in
a blanket, play at chuck with china plates, run his head against a wall,
hop upon one leg for an hour together, carry a red-hot poker round the
room between his teeth, and say, "done first for fifty."

{17}He was quite the thing, either for kicking up a riot, or keeping
it up after he had kicked it up: he was quite the thing, for one day he
kicked an old woman's codlin-kettle about the streets: another time he
shoved a blind horse into a china shop--_that was damned jolly_: he was
a constant customer to the round house: a terror to modest women, and a
dupe to the women of the town; of which this is exhibited as a portrait.
[_ Take the head._] This is the head of a Man of the Town, or a Blood;
and this of a Woman of the Town, or a ------; but whatever other title
the lady may have, we are not entitled to take notice of it; all that we
can say is, that we beg Mirth will spare one {18}moment to Pity; let not
delicacy be offended if we pay a short tribute of compassion to these
unhappy examples of misconduct; indeed, in the gay seasons of irregular
festivity, indiscretion appears thus--[_takes off that, shews the
other:_] but there is her certain catastrophe; how much therefore
ought common opinion to be despised, which supposes the same fact, that
betrays female honour, can add to that of a gentleman's. When a beauty
is robbed, the hue and cry which is raised, is never raised in her
favour; deceived by ingratitude, necessity forces her to continue
criminal, she is ruined by our sex, and prevented reformation by the
reproaches of her own. [_Takes it off._] As this is the head of a Blood
going to keep it up [_takes it off_], here is the head of a Blood after
he has kept it up. [_Shews that head._] This is the head of a married
Blood--what a pretty piece of additional furniture this is to a lady of
delicacy's bed-chamber: What then? it's beneath a man of spirit, with
a bumper in his hand, to think of a wife: that would be spoiling his
sentiment: no, he is to keep it up, and to shew in what manner our
London Bloods do keep it up. We shall conclude the first part of this
lecture by attempting a specimen--[_puts on the Blood's wig_]: "Keep it
up, huzza! {19}keep it up! I loves fun, for I made a fool of my father
last April day. I will tell you what makes me laugh so; we were keeping
it up, faith, so about four o'clock this morning I went down into the
kitchen, and there was Will the waiter fast asleep by the kitchen fire;
the dog cannot keep it up as we do: so what did I do, but I goes softly,
and takes the tongs, and I takes a great red-hot coal out of the fire,
as big as my head, and I plumpt it upon the fellow's foot, because I
loves fun; so it has lamed the fellow, and that makes me laugh so. You
talk of your saying good things; I said one of the best things last week
that ever any man said in all the world. It was what you call your
_rappartees_, your _bobinates_. I'll tell you what it was: You must
know, I was in high spirits, faith, so I stole a dog from a blind man,
for I do love fun! so then the blind man cried for his dog, and that
made me laugh; so says I to the blind man, 'Hip, master, do you want
your dog?' 'Yes, sir,' says he. Now, only mind what I said to the
blind man. Says I, 'Do you want your dog?' 'Yes, sir,' says he. Then
says I to the blind man, says I, 'Go look for him.'--Keep it up! keep it
up!--That's the worst of it, I always turn sick when I think of a
parson, I always do; and my brother he {20}is a parson too, and he hates
to hear any body swear; so I always swear when I am along with him, to
roast him. I went to dine with him one day last week, and there was my
sisters, and two or three more of what you call your modest women; but I
sent 'em all from the table before the dinner was half over, for I loves
fun; and so there was nobody but my brother and me, and I begun to
swear; I never swore so well in all my life; I swore all my new oaths;
it would have done you good to have heard me swear: so then, my brother
looked frightened, and that was fun. At last he laid down his knife and
fork, and lifting up his hands and his eyes, he calls out, _Oh Tempora!
oh Mores!_---'Oh ho, brother!' says I, 'what, you think to frighten me,
by calling all your family about you; but I don't mind you, nor your
family neither--Only bring Tempora and Mores here, that's all; I'll box
them for five pounds; here,--where's Tempora and Mores? where are
they?--Keep it up! keep it up!"

END OF PART I.




PART II.

THE FIVE SCIENCES: ARCHITECTURE, PAINTING, POETRY, MUSIC, AND
ASTRONOMY.

{21}This is a small exhibition of pictures. These pictures are placed
here to shew the partiality of the present times. Formerly seven cities
contended for the honour of having Homer for their countryman; but as
soon as it was known these sciences were born in England, the whole club
of Connoiseurs exclaimed against them, saying, it was impossible that
there could be any real genius among them, our atmosphere being too
thick and too heavy to nourish any fine ideas. These sciences, being
found out to be mere English, were treated as impostors; for, as they
had not ft handsome wife, nor sister, to speak for them, not one single
election vote in their family, nor a shilling in their pockets to bribe
the turnpike {22}door-keeper, they could not succeed; besides, Chinese,
zig-zag, and gothic imitations, monopolized all premiums: and the envy
of prejudice, and the folly of fashion, made a party against them. They
were so weak in themselves, as to imagine the merits of their works
would recommend them to the world. Poor creatures! they knew nothing of
the world, to suppose so; for merit is the only thing in the world not
recommendable. To prevent starving, Architecture hired herself as a
brick-layer's {23}labourer to a Chinese temple-builder; Painting took on
as a colour-grinder to a paper-stainer; Poetry turned printer's devil;
Music sung ballads about the streets: and Astronomy {24}sold almanacks.
They rambled about in this manner for some time; at last, they picked
up poor Wit, who lay ill of some bruises he had received one masquerade
night.

As poor Wit was coming down the Haymarket, just as the masquerade
was breaking up, the noise of a pickpocket was announced, upon which
Buffoonery fell upon Wit, and mangled him most piteously. Invention
stood Wit's friend, and help-ed him to make his escape to those
Sciences. Now it happened that night, Lady Fashion had lost her
lap-dog, which Wit found, and brought to these his companions, for
whom Architecture built a little house; Painting made a portrait of it:
Poetry wrote a copy of verses upon it, which Music put a tune to; and
Astronomy calculated the dear creature's nativity; which so pleased Lady
Fashion, that she recommended them to the house of Ostentation, but left
Wit behind, because as wit was out of taste, Fashion would not have
any thing to say to it. However, some of her Ladyship's upper servants
invited Wit into the steward's room, and, according to the idea some
folks have of Wit, they begged he'd be comical. One brought him a poker
to bend over his arm; another desired he would eat a little fire for 'em
before dinner; the {25}butler requested a tune upon the musical glasses;
my lady's woman desired he would tell her fortune by the cards; and the
grooms said, "as how, if his honour was a wit, he could ride upon three
horses at once." But before Wit could answer to any of these questions,
the French governess belonging to the family came down stairs, and
ordered Wit to be turned out of doors, saying, "Vat want you vid Vit,
when you are studying a la Francoise? I'll vous assurez, I'll vous
assurez, if you will have us for your masters, you must have no vit at
all." [_The sciences taken off._]

Poor Wit being turned out of doors, wandered about friendless, for
it was never yet known that a man's wit ever gained him a friend. He
applied himself to the proprietors of the newspapers, but upon their
inquiring whether he understood politics, and being totally ignorant of
them, they would not employ him. He enquired after Friendship, but found
Friendship was drowned at the last general election; he went to find out
Hospitality, but Hospitality being invited to a turtle-feast, there was
no room for Wit; he asked after Charity, but it being found that Charity
was that day run over by a bishop's new set of coach-horses, he died
broken-hearted, being a distemper which, although {26}not catalogued in
the Materia Medica, is very epidemical among beautiful women, and men
of genius, who, having worn themselves out in making other people
happy, are at last neglected, and left to perish amid age and infirmity,
wondering how the world could be so ungrateful.

Here is the Head of a Connoisseur. [_Takes the head._]--Though born in
this kingdom, he had travelled long enough to fall in love with every
thing foreign, and despise every thing belonging to his own country,
except himself. He pretended to be a great judge of paintings, but only
admired those done a great way off, and a great while ago; he could not
bear anything done by any of his own countrymen; and one day being in
an auction-room where {27}there was a number of capital pictures, and,
among the rest, an inimitable piece of painting of fruits and flowers,
the Connoisseur would not give his opinion of the picture until he had
examined his catalogue, and finding it was done by an Englishman, he
pulled out his eye-glass [_Takes the eyeglass,_] "O, Sir," says he,
"these English fellows have no more idea of genius than a Dutch skipper
has of dancing a cotillion; the dog has spoiled a fine piece of canvas;
he's worse than a Harp-Alley sign-post dauber; there's no keeping,
no perspective, no fore-ground;--why there now, the fellow {28}has
attempted to paint a fly upon that rose-bud, why it's no more like a fly
than I am like an a--a--." But as the connoisseur approached his finger
to the picture, the fly flew away---His eyes are half closed; this is
called the wise man's wink, and shews he can see the world with half
an eye; he had so wonderful a penetration, so inimitable a forecast, he
always could see how every thing was to be--after the affair was over.

Then talking of the affairs of administration, he told his lordship,
that he could see how things were all along, they could not deceive him.
"I can see if other people can't; I can see, if the ministry take the
lead, they won't be behind hand." This man found out the only scheme
that ever could be invented for paying off the national debt; the scheme
that he found out, he discovered to the ministry as follows:

"Now, my lord duke, I have a scheme to pay off our nation's debt without
burthening the subject with a fresh tax; my scheme is as follows: I
would have all the Thames water bottled up, and sold for Spa water.
Who'll buy it, you'll say? Why the waterman's company must buy it, or
they never could work their boats any more: there's a {29}scheme to
pay off the nation's debt, without burthening the subject with a fresh
tax." [_ Takes the head off._]

Here is a companion for that connoisseur; this is one of your
worldly-wise men, wise in his own conceit; he laughed at all modes
of faith, and would have a reason given him for every thing. He
disinherited his only son because the lad could not give him a reason
why a black hen laid a white egg. He was a great materialist, and thus
he proved the infinity of matter. He told them, that all round things
were globular, all square things flat-sided. Now, Sir, if the bottom is
equal to the top, and the top equal to the bottom, and the {30}bottom
and the top are equal to the four sides, _ergo_, all matter is as broad
as it is long. But he had not in his head matter sufficient to prove
matter efficient; being thus deficient, he knew nothing of the matter.
[_ Takes off the head._]

We shall now exhibit a Freeholder's Head in a very particular state--in
a state of intoxication. [_Shews the head._]

These pieces of money are placed like doors over the senses, to open
and shut just as the distributor of the medicine pleases. And here is an
election picture [_shews it_]: all hands are catching at this; 'tis an
interpretation of that famous sentiment, "May we have in our arms those
we love in our hearts." Now the day of election is {31}madman's holiday,
'tis the golden day of liberty, which every voter, on that day, takes to
market, and is his own salesman: for man at that time being considered
as a mere machine, is acted upon as machines are, and, to make his
wheels move properly, he is properly greased in the fist. [_ Gives
off the picture. _] Every freeholder enjoys his portion of septennial
insanity: he'll eat and drink with every body without paying for it,
because he's bold and free; then he'll knock down every body who won't
say as he says, to prove his abhorrence of arbitrary power, and preserve
the liberty of Old England for ever, huzza! [_Gives off the head._]

The first contested election happened between the three goddesses upon
Mount Ida, whose names were, Juno, Minerva, and Venus, when Paris was
the returning officer, who decreed in favour of Venus, by presenting her
with the golden apple. [_ Takes up the money._] Juno, on her approaching
Paris, told him, that though it was beneath her dignity to converse with
a mortal, yet, if he would be her friend, she would make him a nabob.
Minerva told him how that learning was better than house and land, and
if he would be her friend, she would teach him _propria quae maribus_.
But Venus, who thought it would be wasting time to make {32}use of
words, gave him such a look as put her in possession of the golden
apple. The queen of beauty, out of gratitude to Paris, who had so well
managed the election for her, made him a present of several slices of
that golden pippin, and, in commemoration of that event, such slices
have been made use of as presents at all other general elections; they
have a sympathy like that which happens to electrical wires, let a
hundred hold them in their hands, their sensations will be the same;
but they differ from electricity in one essential point, which is, that
though the touch be ever so great, it never shocks people.

It is a general remark, that novelty is the master-passion of the
English; nothing goes down without it, and nothing so gross, that it
will not make palatable; the art therefore of insuring success in this
town to every adventurer, is, to hit upon something new, as the phrase
is; no matter what it is, it will prove equally attracting, whether it
be a woman riding upon her head at Westminster-Bridge, or one without
any head at all, debating upon politics and religion at Westminster
Forum: but here, let not my fair countrywomen condemn me as an
unmannerly satirist; we respect the taste and understanding, as much as
we admire {33}the beauty and delicacy of the sex; but surely no woman of
sense would suppose we meant to offend her, if we said she was the most
improper person in the world to be made a captain of horse, or a member
of parliament.

This is the head [_takes the head_] of a Female Moderator, or President
of the Ladies' Debating Society: she can prove to a demonstration that
man is an usurper of dignities and preferments, and that her sex has a
just right to participation of both with him: she would have physicians
in petticoats, and lawyers with high heads and French curls; then she
would have _young_ women of spirit to command our fleets and armies, and
_old_ ones to govern the state:--she pathetically laments that {34}women
are considered as mere domestic animals, fit only for making puddings,
pickling cucumbers, or registering cures for the measles and chincough.
If this lady's wishes for reformation should ever be accomplished, we
may expect to hear that an admiral is in the histerics, that a general
has miscarried, and that a prime minister was brought to bed the moment
she opened the budget.

This is the head [_shews it_] of a Male Moderator, and president of
eloquence, at one of her schools in this metropolis. We have schools for
fencing, schools for dancing, and schools at which we learn every thing
but those things which we {35}ought to learn: but this is a school to
teach a man to be an orator; it can convert a cobler into a Demosthenes;
make him thunder over porter, and lighten over gin, and qualify him to
speak on either side of the question in the house of commons, who has
not so much as a single vote for a member of parliament.

Here political tobacconists smoke the measures of government in cut
and dry arguments; here opposition taylors prove the nation has been
cabbaged; here sadlers, turned statesmen, find a curb for the ministry;
here the minority veteran players argue that the scene ought to be
shifted; that the king's household wants a better manager; that there is
no necessity for a wardrobe-keeper; that his majesty's company are a set
of very bad actors; and he humbly moves that the king should discharge
his prompter. Some time ago, the president of this society had a great
constitutional point to decide; but not acquitting himself to the
satisfaction of the ladies, this spirited female seized the chair of
state, and with the crack of her fan opened the business of the evening;
declaring, as women had wisely abolished the vulgar custom of domestic
employment, she saw no reason why their knowledge should be confined to
the dress of a {36}head or the flounce of a petticoat; that government,
in peace and war, was as much their province as the other sex, nay more;
with regard to peace, very little was to be expected where women did not
rule with absolute sway; in respect to war, she insisted, at least, upon
an equivalent, and quoted the examples of many heroines, from the days
of Boadicea, who headed her own armies, down to Hannah Snell, who served
in the ranks; she appealed to her auditors if, notwithstanding their
plumes, that assembly had not as warlike an appearance as half the
officers of the guards, and doubted not but they'd prove to have full as
much courage, if ever put to their shifts. "In history and politics,"
continued she, "have not we a Macaulay? in books of entertainment, a
Griffiths? and in dramatic works an author that, in the last new comedy
of '_Which is the Man_,' disputes the bays with the genius of Drury?
Ladies, were it possible to find a man that would dispute the eloquence
of our tongues, I am sure he must readily yield to the superior
eloquence of our eyes." The gallery cried 'Bravo!' the assembly joined
in general plaudit; and Miss Susannah Cross-stich was chosen nem. con.
perpetual president.

{37}Before I put these heads on one side, I shall give a derivation of
their title. Moderator is derived from _mode_, the fashion, and _rate_,
a tax; and, in its compound sense, implies that Fashion advised these
two to lay their heads together, in order to take advantage of the
passion of the public for out-of-the-way opinions, and out-of-the-way
undertakings. This head seems to be of that order that should inculcate
the doctrine of charity, meekness, and benevolence: but, not finding his
labours in the vineyard sufficiently rewarded, according to the value he
sets upon himself, is now (like many of his functions) an apostate from
grace to faction; and, with a political pamphlet in his hand, instead of
a moral discourse, the pulpit is now become (as Hudibras expresses it)
a drum ecclesiastic, and volunteers are beat up for in that place, where
nothing should be thought of but proselytes to truth.

{38}Among the many heads that have played upon the passions of the
public, this is one [_takes the head'_] that did cut a capital figure in
that way. This is the head of Jonas, or the card-playing conjuring Jew.
He could make matadores with a snap of his fingers, command the four
aces with a whistle, and get odd tricks. But there is a great many
people in London, besides this man, famous for playing odd tricks, and
yet no conjurers neither. This man would have made a great figure in the
law, as he is so dexterous a conveyancer. But the law is a profession
that does not want any jugglers. Nor do we need any longer to load our
heads with the weight of learning, or pore {39} for years over arts
and sciences, when a few months' practice with these pasteboard
pages [_takes the cards_] can make any man's fortune, without his
understanding a single letter of the alphabet, provided he can but slip
the cards, snap his fingers, and utter the unintelligible jargon of
'presto, passa, largo, mento, cocolorum, yaw' like this Jonas. The
moment he comes into company, and takes up a pack of cards, he begins,
"I am no common slight-of hand man; the common slight-of-hand men, they
turn up the things up their sleeves, and make you believe their fingers
deceive your eyes. Now, sir, you shall draw one card, two cards, three
cards, four cards, five cards, half a dozen cards; you look at the card
at this side, you look at the card at that side, and I say blow the
blast; the blast is blown, the card is flown, yaw, yaw: and now, sir, I
will do it once more over again, to see whether my fingers can once more
deceive your eyes. I'll give any man ten thousand pounds if he do the
like. You look at the card of this side, you look at the card on that
side; when I say blow the blast, the blast is blown, the card is
shown, yaw, yaw." But this conjurer, at length discovering that most
practitioners on cards, now-a-days, know as many tricks as himself,
{40}and finding his slights of hand turned to little or no account, now
practises on notes of hand by discount, and is to be found every morning
at twelve in Duke's-place, up to his knuckles in dirt, and at two at
the Bank coffee-house, up to his elbows in money, where these locusts
of society, over a dish of coffee and the book of interest, supply the
temporary wants of necessitous men, and are sure to out-wit 'em, had
they even the cunning of a... Fox!

Here is the head of another Fashionable Foreigner [_shews the head_], a
very simple machine; for he goes upon one spring, self-interest. This
head may be compared to a _disoblezeance_; for there is but one seat in
it, and that is not the seat {41}of understanding: yet it is wonderful
how much more rapidly this will move in the high road of preferment than
one of your thinking, feeling, complex, English heads, in which honour,
integrity, and reason, make such a pother, that no step can be taken
without consulting them. This head, if I may be allowed to speak with
an Irish accent, was a long time boasting of his _feats_: but the last
_fete_ he attempted proved his _defeat_; for, in springing too high, he
got such a fall as would disgrace an Englishman for ever, and which none
but a foreigner's head could recover.

Is it not a pity that foreigners should be admitted familiarly into the
houses of the great, while Englishmen, of real merit, shall be thrust
from their doors with contempt? An instance of which happened in the
following picture--[_The picture brought, and he goes before it._]

{42}Here is an Opera Dancer, or Singer, maintained by us in all the
luxury of extravagance; and in the back ground a maimed soldier and
sailor, who were asking alms, and thrown down by the insolence of the
opera singer's chairman; yet the sailor lost his arm with the gallant
Captain Pierson, and the soldier left his leg on the plains of Minden.
Instead of paying a guinea to see a man stand on one leg--would it not
be better employed were it given to a man who had but one leg to stand
on? But, while these dear creatures condescend to come over here, to
sing to us for {43}the trifling sum of fifteen hundred or two thousand
guineas yearly, in return for such their condescension, we cannot do too
much for them, and that is the reason why we do so little for our own
people. This is the way we reward those who only bring folly into the
country, and the other is the way, and the only way, with which we
reward our deliverers. [_The picture taken off._] Among the number of
exotics, calculated for this evening's entertainment, the head of an
opera composer, or burletta projector, should have been exhibited,
could I have been lucky enough to hit upon any droll visage for that
exhibition: but, after many experiments, I was convinced that no head
for that representation could be so truly ridiculous as my own, if this
assembly do me the honour to accept it. [_Takes up the music-frame and
book._]

Suppose me, for once, a burletta projector, Who attempts a mock musical
scrap of a lecture. Suppose this thing a harpsichord or a spinnet; We
must suppose so, else there's nothing in it; And thus I begin, tho' a
stranger to graces. Those deficiencies must be supplied by grimaces, And
the want of wit made up by making of faces.

{44}[_Changes wigs and sits down._] Come, Carro, come, attend affetuoso,
English be dumb, your language is but so so;

     Adagio is piano, allegro must be forte,
     Go wash my neck and sleeves, because this shirt is dirty
     Mon charmant, prenez guarda,
     Mind what your signior begs,
     Ven you wash, don't scrub so harda,
     You may rub my shirt to rags.
     Vile you make the water hotter--
     Uno solo I compose.
     Put in the pot the nice sheep's trotter,
     And de little petty toes;
     De petty toes are little feet,
     De little feet not big,
     Great feet belong to de grunting hog,
     De petty toes to de little pig.
     Come, daughter dear, carissima anima mea,
     Go boil the kittle, make me some green tea a.
     Ma bella dolce sogno,
     Vid de tea, cream, and sugar bono,
     And a little slice
     Of bread and butter nice.
     A bravo bread, and butter
     Bravissimo-----------imo.

END OF PART II.




PART III.

[_Discovers two ladies on the table._] {45}In spite of all the sneers,
prints, and paragraphs, that have been published to render the ladies'
headdresses ridiculous, sure, when fancy prompts a fine woman to lead
the fashion, how can any man be so Hottentotish as to find fault with
it? I hope here to be acquitted from any design of rendering the ladies
ridiculous; all I aim at is to amuse. Here is a rich dressed lady
without elegance.--Here is an elegant dressed lady without riches;
for riches can no more give grace than they can beget understanding. A
multiplicity of ornaments may load the wearer, but can never
distinguish the gentlewoman. [_Gives off the delicate lady._] This is a
representation of those misled ladies whose families having gained
great fortunes by trade, begin to be ashamed of the industry of their
ancestors, {46}and turn up their nose at every thing mechanical, and
call it _wulgar_. They are continually thrusting themselves among the
nobility, to have it said they keep quality company, and for that empty
qualification expose themselves to all the tortures of ill treatment;
because it is a frolic for persons of rank to mortify such their
imitators. This is vanity without honour, and dignity at second-hand,
and shews that ladies may so far entangle the line of beauty, by not
having it properly unwound for them, till they are lost in a labyrinth
of fashionable intricacies. [_Gives the head off. Takes the head of
Cleopatra._]

Here is a real antique; this is the head of that famous demirep of
antiquity, called Cleopatra, {47}This is the way the ladies of antiquity
used to dress their heads in a morning. [_Gives the head off._] And this
is the way the ladies at present dress their heads in a morning. [_Takes
the head._] A lady in this dress seems hooded like a hawk, with a
blister on each cheek for the tooth-ach. One would imagine this fashion
had been invented by some surly duenna, or ill-natured guardian, on
purpose to prevent ladies turning to one side or the other; and that may
be the reason why now every young lady chooses to look forward. As the
world is round, every thing turns round along with it; no wonder there
should be such revolutions in ladies' head-dresses. This was in fashion
two or three years past; this is the fashion of last year [_takes a head
up_]; and this the morning headdress [_takes the head_] of this present
_anno domini_. These are the winkers, and these are the blinkers.
But, as the foibles of the ladies ought to be treated with the utmost
delicacy, all we can say of these three heads, thus hoodwinked, is, that
they are emblems of the three graces, who, thus muffled, have a mind to
play at blindman's buff together. [_Gives the heads off._]

{48}We shall now exhibit the head of An Old Maid. [_Takes the head._]
This is called antiquated virginity; it is a period when elderly
unmarried ladies are supposed to be bearing apes about in
leading-strings, as a punishment, because, when those elderly unmarried
ladies were young and beautiful, they made monkies of mankind. Old maids
are supposed to be ill-natured and crabbed, as wine kept too long on the
lees will turn to vinegar.

{49}Not to be partial to either sex [_takes the head up_], as a
companion to the Old Maid, here is the head of An Old Bachelor. These
old bachelors are mere bullies; they are perpetually abusing matrimony,
without ever daring to accept of the challenge. When they are in company
they are ever exclaiming against hen-pecked husbands, saying, if they
were married, their wives should never go any where without asking their
lords and masters' leave; and if they were married, the children should
never cry, nor the servants commit a fault: they'd set the house to
rights; they would do every thing. But the lion-like talkers abroad
are mere baa-lambs at home, being generally dupes and slaves to some
termagant mistress, against whose imperiousness they dare not open their
lips, {50}but are frightened even if she frowns. Old bachelors, in this,
resemble your pretenders to atheism, who make a mock in public of
what in private they tremble at and fall down to. When they become
superannuated, they set up for suitors, they ogle through spectacles,
and sing love songs to ladies with catarrhs by way of symphonies,
and they address a young lady with, "Come, my dear, I'll put on my
spectacles and pin your handkerchief for you; I'll sing you a love song;
'How can you, lovely Nancy!'" &c. [_Laughs aloud._] How droll to hear
the dotards aping youth, And talk of love's delights without a tooth!
[_Gives the head off._]

{51}It is something odd that ladies shall have their charms all abroad
in this manner [_takes the head_], and the very next moment this shall
come souse over their _heads_, like an extinguisher. [_Pulls the calash
over._] This is a hood in high taste at the upper end of the town; and
this [_takes the head_] a hood in high taste at the lower end of the
town. Not more different are these two heads in their dresses than
they are in their manner of conversation: this makes use of a delicate
dialect, it being thought polite pronunciation to say instead of cannot,
_ca'ant_; must not _ma'ant_; shall not, _sha'ant_, This clipping
of letters would be extremely detrimental to the current coin of
conversation, did not these good dames make ample amends by adding
supernumerary syllables when they talk of _break-fastes_, and
_toastesses_, and running their heads against the postasses to avoid
the wild _beastesses_. These female orators, brought up at the bar
of Billingsgate, have a peculiar way of expressing themselves, which,
however indelicate it may seem to more civilized ears, is exactly
conformable to the way of ancient oratory. The difference between
ancient and modern oratory consists in saying something or nothing to
the purpose. Some people talk without saying any thing; some people
{52}don't care what they say; some married men would be glad to have
nothing to say to their wives; and some husbands would be full as glad
if their wives had not any thing to say to them. [_ Gives the head
off._] Ancient oratory is the gift of just persuasion; modern oratory
the knack of putting words, not things, together; for speech-makers now
are estimated, not by the merit, but by the length of their harangues;
they are minuted as we do galloping horses, and their goodness rated
according as they hold out against time. For example, a gentleman lately
coming into a coffee-house, and expressing himself highly pleased with
some debates which he had just then heard, one of his acquaintance
begged the favour that he would tell the company what the debates were
about.

"About, Sir!--Yes, Sir.--About!--what were they debating about? Why they
were about five hours long." "But what did they say, Sir?" "What did
they say, Sir? Why one man said every thing; he was up two hours, three
quarters, nineteen seconds, and five eighths, by my watch, which is
the best stop-watch in England; so, if I don't know what he said, who
should? for I had my eye upon my watch all the time he was speaking."
"Which side was he of?" "Why {53}he was of my side, I stood close by him
all the time."

Here are the busts of two ancient laughing and crying Philosophers,
or orators. [_Takes the two heads up._] These in their life-time were
heads, of two powerful factions, called the Groaners and the Grinners.
_(Holds one head in each hand.)_ This Don Dismal's faction, is a
representation of that discontented part of mankind who are always
railing at the times, and the world, and the people of the world: This
is a good-natured fellow, that made the best of every thing: and this
Don Dismal would attack his brother--"Oh, brother! brother! brother!
what will this world come to?" "The same place it set out from this day
twelve-month." "When will the nation's debt be paid {54}off?" "Will
you pass your word for it?" "These are very slippery times--very
slippery times." "They are always so in frosty weather." "What's become
of our liberty?--Where shall we find liberty?" "In Ireland, to be
sure." "I can't bear to see such times." "Shut your eyes then." [_
Gives the heads off._]

It may seem strange to those spectators [_takes the head_] who are
unacquainted with the reasons that induce ladies to appear in such
caricatures, how that delicate sex can walk under the weight of such
enormous head-coverings; but what will not English hearts endure for the
good of their country? And it's all for the good of their country the
ladies wear such appearances; for, while mankind are such enemies to Old
England as to run wool to France, our ladies, by making use of wool as
part of their head-dresses [_lets down the tail and takes out the wool_],
keep it at home, and encourage the woollen manufactory. [_Takes off the
head._]

But, as all our fashions descend to our inferiors, a servant maid, in
the Peak of Derbyshire, having purchased an old tete from a puppet-show
woman, and being at a loss for some of this wool to stuff out the curls
with, fancied a whisp of hay might {55}do. [_Takes the head._] Here
is the servant maid, with her new-purchased finery; and here is her
new-fashioned stuffing. But, before she had finished at her garret
dressing-table, a ring at the door called her down stairs to receive a
letter from the postboy; turning back to go into the house again, the
postboy's horse, being hungry, laid hold of the head-dress by way of
forage. Never may the fair sex meet with a worse misfortune; but may the
ladies, always hereafter, preserve their heads in good order. Amen.

Horace, in describing a fine woman, makes use of two Latin words,
which are, _simplex munditiis_. Now these two words cannot be properly
translated; {56}their best interpretation is that of a young Female
Quaker. [_Takes the head._] Such is the effect of native neatness.
Here is no bundle of hair to set her off, no jewels to adorn her, nor
artificial complexion. Yet there is a certain odium which satire has
dared to charge our English ladies with, which is, plastering the
features with whitewash, or rubbing rouge or red upon their faces.
[_Gives the head off._] Women of the town may lay on red, because, like
pirates, the dexterity of their profession consists in their engaging
under false colours; but, for the delicate, the inculpable part of the
sex, to vermilion their faces, seems as if ladies would fish for lovers
as men bait for mackerel, by hanging something red upon the hook; or
that they imagined men to be of the bull or turkey-cock kind, that would
fly at any thing scarlet. [_Takes the head off._] But such practitioners
should remember that their faces are the works of their Creator.--If
bad, how dare they mend it? If good, why mend it? Are they ashamed of
his work, and proud of their own? If any such there are, let 'em lay by
the art, and blush not to appear that which he blushes not to have made
them. If any lady should be offended with the lecturer's daring to take
such liberties with her sex, by {57}way of atonement for that part of
my behaviour which may appear culpable, I humbly beg leave to offer a
nostrum, or recipe, to preserve the ladies' faces in perpetual bloom,
and defend beauty from all assaults of time; and I dare venture to
affirm, not all the paints, pomatums, or washes, can be of so much
service to make the ladies look lovely as the application of this.
[_Shews the girdle of good temper._]

Let but the ladies wear this noble order, and they never will be angry
with me; this is the grand secret of attraction; this is the Girdle
op Venus, which Juno borrowed to make herself appear {58}lovely to her
husband Jupiter, and what is here humbly recommended to all married
folks of every denomination; and to them I appeal, whether husband or
wife, wife or husband, do not alternately wish each other would wear
this girdle? But here lies the mistake; while the husband _begs_ his
wife, the wife _insists_ upon the husband's putting it on; in the
contention the girdle drops down between them, and neither of them will
condescend to stoop first to take it up. [_Lays down the girdle._]. Bear
and forbear, give and forgive, are the four chariot-wheels that carry
Love to Heaven: Peace, Lowliness, Fervency, and Taste, are the four
radiant horses that draw it. Many people have been all their life-time
making this chariot, without ever being able to put one wheel to it.
Their horses have most of them got the springhalt, and that is the
reason why married people now a-days walk a-foot to the Elysian fields.
Many a couple, who live in splendor, think they keep the only carriage
that can convey them to happiness; but their vehicle is too often the
postcoach of ruin; the horses, that draw it are Vanity, Insolence,
Luxury, and Credit; the footmen who ride behind it are Pride, Lust,
Tyranny, and Oppression; the servants out of livery, that wait at table,
{59}are Folly and Wantonness; them Sickness and Death take away. Were
ladies once to see themselves in an ill temper, I question if ever again
they would choose to appear in such a character.

Here is a Lady [_takes up the picture_] in her true tranquil state of
mind, in that amiableness of disposition which makes foreigners declare
that an English lady, when she chooses to be in temper, and chooses
to be herself, is the most lovely figure in the universe; and on the
reverse of this medallion is the same lady when she chooses _not_ to be
in temper, and _not_ to be herself. [_Turns the picture._] This face is
put on when she is disappointed of her masquerade habit, when she has
lost a _sans prendre_, when her lap-dog's foot is trod {60}upon, or when
her husband has dared to contradict her. Some married ladies may have
great cause of complaint against their husbands' irregularities; but is
this a face to make those husbands better? Surely no! It is only by such
looks as these [_turns the picture_] they are to be won: and may the
ladies hereafter only wear such looks, and may this never more be known
[_turns the picture_] only as a picture taken out of AEsop's Fables.
[_Gives off the picture._]

May each married lady preserve her good man, And young ones get good
ones as fast as they can.

It is very remarkable there should be such a plentiful harvest of
courtship before marriage, and generally such a famine afterwards.
Courtship is a fine bowling-green turf, all galloping round and
sweet-hearting, a sunshine holiday in summer time: but when once through
matrimony's turnpike, the weather becomes wintry, and some husbands
are seized with a cold aguish fit, to which the faculty have given this
name--[_Shews the girdle of indifference._] Courtship is matrimony's
running footman, but seldom stays to see the stocking thrown; it is
too often carried away by the two grand preservatives of matrimonial
{61}friendship, delicacy and gratitude. There is also another distemper
very mortal to the honeymoon; 'tis what the ladies sometimes are seized
with, and the college of physicians call it by this title--[_Shews the
girdle of the sullens._]

This distemper generally arises from some ill-conditioned speech, with
which the lady has been hurt; who then, leaning on her elbow upon the
arm-chair, her cheek resting upon the back of her hand, her eyes fixed
earnestly upon the fire, her feet beating tattoo time: the husband in
the mean while biting his lips, pulling down his ruffles, stamping
about the room, and looking at his lady {62}like the devil: at last he
abruptly demands of her her,

"What's the matter with you, madam?"

The lady mildly replies,

"Nothing."

"What is it you mean, madam?"

"Nothing."

"What would you make me, madam?"

"Nothing."

"What is it I have done to you, madam?"

"O--h--nothing." And this quarrel arose as they sat at breakfast. The
lady very innocently observed, she believed the tea was made with Thames
water. The husband, in mere contradiction, insisted upon it that the
tea-kettle was filled out of the New River.

{63}From a scene of matrimonial tumult here is one of matrimonial
tranquillity. [_Matrimonial picture brought on, and you go forward._]
Here is an after-dinner wedlock _tete-a-tete_, a mere matrimonial
_vis-a-vis_; the husband in a yawning state of dissipation, and the lady
in almost the same drowsy attitude, called, A nothing-to-doishness. If
an unexpected visitor should happen to break in upon their solitude,
the lady, in her apology, declares that "she is horribly chagrined, and
most immensely out of countenance, to be caught in such a deshabille:
but, upon honour, she did not mind {64}how her clothes were huddled on,
not expecting any company, there being nobody at home but her husband."

The gentleman, he shakes his guest by the hand, and says, "I am
heartily glad to see you, Jack; I don't know how it was, I was almost
asleep; for, as there was nobody at home but my wife, I did not know
what to do with myself."

END OF PART III.




PART IV.

{65}We shall now consider the law, as our laws are very considerable,
both in bulk and number, according as the statutes declare;
_considerandi, considerando, considerandum_; and are not to be meddled
with by those that don't understand 'em. Law always expressing itself
with true grammatical precision, never confounding moods, cases, or
genders, except indeed when a _woman_ happens accidentally to be slain,
then the verdict is always brought in _man_-slaughter. The essence of
the law is altercation; for the law can altercate, fulminate, deprecate,
irritate, and go on at any rate. Now the quintessence of the law has,
according to its name, five parts. The first is the _beginning_, or
_incipiendum_; the second the _uncertainty_, or _dubitandum_; the
third _delay_, or _puzzliendum_; fourthly _replication_ without _endum_;
and, fifthly, _monstrum et horrendum_.

{66}All which are exemplified in the following cases, Daniel against
Dishclout.--Daniel was groom in the same family wherein Dishclout was
cookmaid; and Daniel, returning home one day fuddled, he stooped down to
take a sop out of the dripping-pan, which spoiled his clothes, and he
was advised to bring his action against the cookmaid; the pleadings of
which were as follow. The first person who spoke was Mr. Serjeant
Snuffle. He began, saying, "Since I have the honour to be pitched upon
to open this cause to your Lordship, I shall not impertinently presume
to take up any of your Lordship's time by a round-about circumlocutory
manner of speaking or talking, quite foreign to the purpose, and not any
ways relating to the matter in hand. I shall, I will, I design to shew
what damages my client has sustained hereupon, whereupon, and thereupon.
Now, my Lord, my client, being a servant in the same family with
Dishclout, and not being at board wages, imagined he had a right to the
fee-simple of the dripping-pan, therefore he made an attachment on the
sop with his right-hand, which the defendant replevied with her left,
tripped us up, and tumbled us into the dripping-pan. Now, in Broughton's
Reports, Slack _versus_ Small wood, it is said that _primus {67}strocus
sine jocus, absolutus est provokus_. Now who gave the _primus strocus?_
who gave the first offence? Why, the cook; she brought the driping-pan
there; for, my Lord, though we will allow, if we had not been there, we
could not have been thrown down there; yet, my Lord, if the dripping-pan
had not been there, for us to have tumbled down into, we could not have
tumbled into the dripping-pan." The next counsel on the same side began
with, "My Lord, he who makes use of many words to no purpose has not
much to say for himself, therefore I shall come to the point at once; at
once and immediately I shall come to the point. My client was in liquor:
the liquor in him having served an ejectment upon his understanding,
common sense was nonsuited, and he was a man beside himself, as Dr.
Biblibus declares, in his Dissertation upon Bumpers, in the 139th folio
volume of the Abridgment of the Statutes, page 1286, where he says, that
a drunken man is _homo duplicans_, or a double man; not only because he
sees things double, but also because he is not as he should be,
_profecto ipse_ he; but is as he should not be, _defecto tipse_ he."

{68}The counsel on the other side rose up gracefully, playing with his
ruffles prettily, and tossing the ties of his wig about emphatically.
He began with, "My Lord, and you, gentlemen of the jury, I humbly do
conceive I have the authority to declare that I am counsel in this case
for the defendant; therefore, my Lord, I shall not flourish away in
words; words are no more than filligree work. Some people may think them
an embellishment; but to me it is a matter of astonishment how any one
can be so impertinent to the detriment of all rudiment. But, my Lord,
this is not to be looked at through the medium of right and wrong; for
the law knows no medium, and {69}right and wrong are but its shadows.
Now, in the first place, they have called a kitchen my client's
premises. Now a kitchen is nobody's premises; a kitchen is not a
warehouse, nor a wash-house, a brew-house, nor a bake-house, an
inn-house, nor an out-house, nor a dwelling-house; no, my Lord, 'tis
absolutely and _bona fide_ neither more nor less than a kitchen, or, as
the law more classically expresses, a kitchen is, _camera necessaria pro
usus cookare; cum saucepannis, stewpannis, scullero, dressero, coalholo,
stovis, smoak-jacko,pro roastandum, boilandum,fryandum, et plum-pudding
mixandum, pro turtle soupos, calve's-head-hashibus, cum calipee et
calepashibus_.

"But we shall not avail ourselves of an _alibi_, but admit of the
existence of a cook-maid. Now my Lord, we shall take it upon a new
ground, and beg a new trial; for, as they have curtailed our name from
plain Mary into Moll, I hope the court will not allow of this; for, if
they were to allow of mistakes, what would the law do? for, when the
law don't find mistakes, it is the business of the law to make them."
Therefore the court allowed them the liberty of a new trial; for the law
is our liberty, and it is happy for us we have the liberty to go to law.

{70}By all the laws of laughing, every man is at liberty to play the
fool with himself; but some people, fearful it would take from their
consequence, choose to do it by proxy: hence comes the appearance of
keeping fools in great families. [_Takes the head._] Thus are they
dressed, and shew, by this party-coloured garment, they are related to
all the wise families in the kingdom.

This is a Fool's Cap; 'tis put upon Nobody's head. Nobody's face is
without features, because we could not put Anybody's face upon Nobody's
head. This is the head of Somebody. [_Takes the head._] It has two
faces, for Somebody is supposed to carry two faces. One of these
faces is handsome, the other rather ill-favoured. The handsome face
is exhibited as a hint to that part {71}of mankind who are always
whispering among their acquaintance, how well they are with Somebody,
and that Somebody is a very fine woman. One of those boasters of beauty,
one night at a tavern, relating his amazing amours, the toast-master
called him to order, and a gentleman in a frolic, instead of naming
any living lady for his toast, gave the Greek name of the tragic muse
Melpomene; upon which the boaster of beauty, the moment he heard the
word Melpomene, addresses the toast-master, "Oh! ho! Mr. Toastmaster,
you are going a round of demireps. Ay, ay, Moll Pomene, I remember her
very well; she was a very fine girl, and so was her sister, Bet Po-mene;
I had 'em both at a certain house, you know where?" Can we help smiling
at the partiality of the present times? that a man should be transported
if he snares a hare, or nets a partridge, and yet there is no punishment
for those whisperers away of ladies' reputations? But ill tongues would
fall hurtless were there no believers to give them credit; as robbers
could not continue to pilfer were there no receivers of stolea goods.

{72}Here is the head [_takes it_] of Anybody, with his eyes closed, his
mouth shut, and his ears stopped; and this is exhibited as an emblem
of wisdom; and anybody may become wise, if they will not spy into the
faults of others, tell tales of others, nor listen to the tales of
others, but mind their own business, and be satisfied. Here is the head
[_takes it_] of Everybody. [_ Turns the head round._] This is to show
how people dread popular clamour, or what all the world will say, or
what every body will say. Nay, there is not a poor country wench,
when her young master the 'squire attempts to delude her, but will
immediately reply to him, "Lord!--Your honour!--What will the world
say?" And this, _what will the {73}world say_, is what everybody is
anxious after, although it is hardly worth anybody's while to trouble
their heads with the world's sayings.

These four heads of Nobody, Everybody, Somebody, and Anybody, form a
fifth head, called a Busybody. The Busybody is always anxious after
something about Somebody. He'll keep company with Anybody to find out
Everybody's business; and is only at a loss when this head stops his
pursuit, and Nobody will give him an answer. It is from these four heads
the fib of each day is fabricated. Suspicion begets the morning whisper,
the gossip Report circulates it as a secret, wide-mouthed Wonder gives
Credulity credit for it, and Self-interest authenticates that, as
Anybody may be set to work by Somebody, Everybody's alarmed at it, and,
at last, there is Nobody knows any thing at all of the matter. From
these four heads people purchase lottery-tickets, although calculation
demonstrates the odds are so much against them; but Hope flatters them,
Fancy makes them believe, and Expectation observes, that the twenty
thousand pounds prizes must come to Somebody [_gives the head off_];
and, as Anybody may have them [_gives the head off_], and Nobody
{74}knows who [_gives the head off_], Everybody buys lottery-tickets.
[_Gives the head off._]

Most difficult it is for any single speaker long to preserve the
attention of his auditors: nay, he could not continue speaking,
conscious of that difficulty, did he not depend greatly on the humanity
of his hearers. Yet it is not flattery prompts the lecturer to this
address; for, to shew in how odious a light he holds flattery, he here
exposes the head of flattery. [_Takes the head._]

This being, called Flattery, was begat upon Poverty, by Wit; and that
is the reason why poor {75}wits are always the greatest flatterers. The
ancients had several days they called lucky and unlucky ones; they
were marked as white and black days. Thus is the face of Flattery
distinguished; to the lucky she shews her white, or shining profile;
to the unlucky she is always in eclipse: but, on the least approach
of calamity, immediately Flattery changes into reproach. [_Opens the
head._] How easy the transition is from flattery into reproach; the
moral of which is, that it is a reproach to our understandings to
suffer flattery. But some people are so fond of that incense, that they
greedily accept it, though they despise the hand that offers it, without
considering the receiver is as bad as the thief. As every head here is
intended to convey some moral, the moral of this head is as follows:
This head was the occasion of the first duel that ever was fought, it
then standing on a pillar, in the centre, where four roads met. Two
knights-errant, one from the north, and one from the south, arrived at
the same instant at the pillar whereon this head was placed: one of the
knights-errant, who only saw this side of the head, called out, "It
is a shame to trust a silver head by the road side." "A silver head!"
replied the knight, who only saw this side of the head, "it is a black
{76}head." Flat contradiction produced fatal demonstration; their swords
flew out, and they hacked and hewed one another so long, that, at last,
fainting with loss of blood, they fell on the ground; then, lifting
up their eyes, they discovered their mistake concerning this image. A
venerable hermit coming by, bound up their wounds, placed them again on
horseback, and gave them this piece of advice, That they never hereafter
should engage in any parties, or take part in any dispute, without
having previously examined both sides of the question.

We shall now conclude this part of the lecture with four national
characters.

{77}Here is the head of a Frenchman [_shews the head_], all levity and
lightness, singing and capering from morning till night, as if he looked
upon life to be but a long dance, and liberty and law but a jig. Yet
Monsieur talks in high strains of the law, though he lives in a country
that knows no law but the caprice of an absolute monarch. Has he
property? an edict from the Grand Monarch can take it, and the slave
is satisfied. Pursue him to the Bastile, or the dismal dungeon in the
country to which a _lettre de cachet_ conveys him, and buries the wretch
for life: there see him in all his misery; ask him "What is the cause?"

{78}"_Je ne scai pas_, it is de will of de Grand Monarch." Give him a
_soupe maigre_, a little sallad, and a hind quarter of a frog, and he's
in spirits.--"_Fal, lai, lai, vive le roy, vive la bagatelle_." He is
now the declared enemy of Great Britain: ask him, "Why?--has England
done your country an injury?" "Oh no." "What then is your cause of
quarrel?" "England, sir, not give de liberty to de subject. She will
have de tax upon de tea; but, by gar, sir, de Grand Monarch have send
out de fleet and de army to chastise de English; and, ven de America are
free, de Grand Monarch he tax de American himself." "But, Monsieur,
is France able to cope with England on her own element, the sea?" "_Oh!
pourquois non?_" "Why not?"

{79}Here is the head of a British Tar [_shews the head_]; and, while
England can man her navy with thousands of these spirits, Monsieur's
threats are in vain. Here is a man who despises danger, wounds,
and death; he fights with the spirit of a lion, and, as if (like a
salamander) his element was fire, gets fresh courage as the action grows
hotter; he knows no disgrace like striking to the French flag; no reward
for past services so ample as a wooden leg; and no retreat so honourable
as Greenwich hospital. Contrast his behaviour with that of a French
sailor, who must have a drawn sword over his head to make him stand to
his gun, who runs trembling to the priest for an absolution--"_Ah, mon
bon pere, avez pitie de moi!_" when he

{80}should look death in the face like a man. This brave tar saw the
gallant Farmer seated on his anchor, his ship in a blaze, his eye fixed
on the wide expanse of the waters round him, scorning to shrink, waiting
with the calm firmness of a hero for the moment when he was to die
gloriously in the service of his country.

Here is the head of a Spaniard, [_Shews the head._] But first I had
better remove the Frenchman, for fear of a quarrel between the two
allies. Now he has no dislike to England; he wishes, as Spain ever did,
for peace with England, and war with all the world; he remembers the
latter end {81}of the last war, the British fleets thundering in their
ports, and the whole nation abhorring the French for the calamities
brought upon them by an intriguing Italian cabinet. He was taken
prisoner by the gallant Sir George Rodney; and the only favour he asked,
upon coming to England, was not to be imprisoned with a Frenchman,
detesting all connexion with that superficial, dancing, treacherous
people. The Frenchman, vain and sanguine to the last, encourages his
ally to persevere. _Attendre, attendre, mon cher ami_.--"Wait, my good
friend, we shall get the game yet." "Certainly," replies the grave Don,
"for we get all the rubbers." But, whilst these two are mourning over
their losses by the war, here comes another to complete the procession
of madness and folly.

{82}This is the head [_shews it_] of Mynheer Van Neverfelt Large Breecho
Love Cabbecho Dutch Doggero, a great merchant at Rotterdam; who had
amassed an immense fortune by supplying the enemies of Great Britain
with hemp, and who, if he had his deserts, should die as he has lived
by it. He considers treaties as mere court promises; and these, in the
vulgar acceptation of a pie-crust, whenever they cover any advantage, it
is but breaking them, and down with friendship and honour in a bite.
He looks upon interest to be the true law of nature, and principal a
Sinking Fund, in which no Dutchman should be concerned. He looks upon
money to be the greatest good upon earth, and a pickled herring {83}the
greatest dainty. If you would ask him what wisdom is, he'll answer
you, Stock. If you ask him what benevolence is, he'll reply, Stock: and
should you inquire who made him, he would say, Stock; for Stock is the
only deity he bows down to. If you would judge of his wit, his whole
Stock lies in a pipe of tobacco; and, if you would judge of his
conversation, a bull and a bear are his Stock companions. His conduct
to all men and all nations is most strikingly typified by Hogarth's Paul
before Felix, in true Dutch gusto, where the guardian angel, Conscience,
has fallen asleep, which Avarice, in the shape of the devil, taking
advantage of, saws asunder the legs of the stool upon which the apostle
is exhibited standing. But the vengeance of Britain's insulted genius
has overtaken him, in the east and in the west, and Holland has received
blows, for her breach of compacts, she will remember as long as her
dykes defend her from the encroachments of the ocean.

When men have eminently distinguished themselves in arts or arms, their
characters should be held up to the public with every mark of honour, to
inspire the young candidate for fame with a generous emulation. There
is a noble enthusiasm in great minds, which not only inclines them to
{84}behold illustrious actions with wonder and delight, but kindles also
a desire of attaining the same degree of excellence. The Romans, who
well knew this principle in human nature, decreed triumphs to their
generals, erected obelisks and statues in commemoration of their
victories; and to this day the cabinet of the antiquarian preserves
records of the victories of a Germanicus, the generosity of a Titus, or
the peaceful virtues of an Antonius. Why then should not England adopt
the practice of the Romans, a people who reached the highest pinnacle of
military glory? It is true that some of our great generals have marble
monuments in Westminster Abbey. But why should not the living enjoy
the full inheritance of their laurels? If they deserve to have their
victories proclaimed to the world by the voice of Fame, let it be when
men are sensible to the sweetness of her trumpet, for she will then
sound like an angel in their ears. Here is the head of a British Hero; a
title seldom conferred, and as seldom merited, till the ardent valour of
the youthful warrior is ripened into the wisdom and cool intrepidity of
the veteran. He entered the service with the principles of a Soldier
and a patriot, the love of fame, and the love of his country. His mind
active and {85}vigorous, burning with the thirst of honour, flew to
posts of danger with a rapidity which gave tenfold value to his military
exertions, and rendered his onsets terrible as resistless. No expedition
appeared to him either difficult or impracticable that was to be
undertaken for the good of the cause he had embarked in. Fortune too
seemed enamoured of his valour, for she preserved his life in many
actions; and, though he cannot stretch forth an arm without shewing
an honourable testimony of the dangers to which he was exposed, he has
still a hand left to wield a sword for the service of his country. As he
is yet in the prime of life, there is nothing too great to be expected
from him. He resembles the immortal Wolfe in his fire and fame. And
oh, for the good of England, that Wolfe, in his fortunes, had resembled
Tableton!

END OF PART IV.




PART V.

{86}We shall now return to the law, for our laws are full of returns,
and we we shall shew a compendium of law [_takes the wig_]; parts of
practice in the twist of the tail.--The depth of a full bottom denotes
the length of a chancery suit, and the black coif behind, like a
blistering plaister, seems to shew us that law is a great irritator, and
only to be used in cases of necessity.

We shall now beg leave to change the fashion of the head-dress, for,
like a poor periwig-maker, I am obliged to mount several patterns on the
same block.

[_Puts on the wig, and takes the nosegay._]

{87}Law is law, law is law, and as in such and so forth, and hereby, and
aforesaid, provided always, nevertheless, notwithstanding. Law is like a
country dance, people are led up and down in it till they are tired. Law
is like a book of surgery, there are a great many terrible cases in it.
It is also like physic, they that take least of it are best off. Law is
like a homely gentlewoman, very well to follow. Law is like a scolding
wife, very bad when it follows us. Law is like a new fashion, people are
bewitched to get into it; it is also like bad weather, most people are
glad when they get out of it.

{88}We shall now mention a cause, called "Bullum _versus_ Boatum:" it
was a cause that came before me. The cause was as follows.

There were two farmers; farmer A and farmer B. Farmer A was seized or
possessed of a bull: farmer B was possessed of a ferry-boat. Now the
owner of the ferry-boat, having made his boat fast to a post on shore,
with a piece of hay, twisted rope-fashion, or, as we say, _vulgo
vocato_, a hay-band.

After he had made his boat fast to a post on shore, as it was very
natural for a hungry man to do, he went up town to dinner; farmer A's
bull, as it was very natural for a hungry bull to do, came down town to
look for a dinner; and, observing, discovering, seeing, and spying-out,
some turnips in the bottom of the ferry-boat, the bull scrambled into
the ferry-boat: he ate up the turnips, and, to make an end of his meal,
fell to work upon the hay-band: the boat, being eaten from its moorings,
floated down the river, with the bull in it: it struck against a rock;
beat a hole in the bottom of the boat, and tossed the bull overboard;
whereupon the owner of the bull brought his action against the boat,
for running away with the bull. The owner of the boat brought his action
against the bull for running away with the {89} boat. And thus notice of
trial was given, Bullum _versus_ Boatum, Boatum _versus_ Bullum.

Now the Counsel for the bull began with saying, "My Lord, and you
gentlemen of the jury, we are counsel in this cause for the bull. We are
indicted for running away with the boat. Now, my Lord, we have heard
of running horses, but never of running bulls before. Now, my Lord, the
bull could no more run away with the boat than a man in a coach may be
said to run away with the horses; therefore, my Lord, how can we punish
what is not punishable? How can we eat what is not eatable? Or, how can
we drink what is not drinkable? Or, as the law says, how can we think on
what is not thinkable? Therefore, my {90}Lord, as we are counsel in this
cause for the bull, if the jury should bring the bull in guilty, the
jury would be guilty of a bull."

The counsel for the boat observed that the bull should be nonsuited,
because, in his declaration, he had not specified what colour he was of;
for thus wisely, and thus learnedly, spoke the counsel.--"My Lord, if
the bull was of no colour, he must be of some colour; and, if he was
not of any colour, what colour could the bull be of?" I over-ruled this
motion myself, by observing the bull was a white bull, and that white is
no colour: besides, as I told my brethren, they should not trouble their
heads to talk of colour in the law, for the law can colour any thing.
This cause being afterwards left to a reference, upon the award both
bull and boat were acquitted, it being proved that the tide of the river
carried them both away; upon which I gave it as my opinion, that, as the
tide of the river carried both bull and boat away, both bull and boat
had a good action against the water-bailiff.

My opinion being taken, an action was issued, and, upon the traverse,
this point of law arose, How, wherefore, and whether, why, when, and
what, whatsoever, whereas, and whereby, as the {91}boat was not a
_compos mentis_ evidence, how could an oath be administered? That point
was soon settled by Boatum's attorney declaring that, for his client, he
would swear any thing.

The water-bailiff's charter was then read, taken out of the original
record in true law Latin; which set forth, in their declaration, that
they were carried away either by the tide of flood or the tide of ebb.
The charter of the water-bailiff was as follows. "_Aquae bailiffi est
magistrates in choisi, sapor omnibus fishibus qui habuerunt finnos et
scalos, claws, shells, et talos, qui swimmare in freshibus, vel saltibus
reveris lakos, pondis, canalibus et well-boats, sive oysteri, prawni,
whitini, shrimpi, turbutus solus_;" that is, not turbots alone, but
turbots and soals both together. But now comes the nicety of the law;
the law is as nice as a new-laid egg, and not to be understood by
addle-headed people. Bullum and Boatum mentioned both ebb and flood to
avoid quibbling; but, it being proved that they were carried away
neither by the tide of flood, nor by the tide of ebb, but exactly upon
the top of high water, they were nonsuited; but, such was the lenity of
the court, upon their paying all costs, they were allowed to begin
again, _de novo_.

{92}This is one of those many thousand Heads [_takes the head_] who
swarm in and about London, whose times and minds are divided between
the affairs of state and the affairs of a kitchen. He was anxious after
venison and politics; he believed every cook to be a great genius; and
to know how to dress a turtle comprehended all the arts and sciences
together. He was always hunting after newspapers, to read about battles;
and imagined soldiers and sailors were only made to be knock'd on the
head, that he might read an account of it in the papers. He read every
political pamphlet that was published on both sides of the question, and
was always on his side whom he read last.

{93}And then he'd come home in a good or ill temper and call for his
night-cap, and pipes and tobacco, and send for some neighbours to sit
with him, and talk politics together. [_Puts on a cap, and takes the
pipes and sits down._]

"How do you do, Mr. Costive? Sit down, sit down. Ay, these times are
hard times; I can no more relish these times than I can a haunch of
venison without sweet sauce to it; but, if you remember, I told you we
should have warm work of it when the cook threw down the Kian pepper.
Ay, ay; I think I know a thing or two; I think I do, that's all. But,
Lord, what signifies what one knows? they don't mind me! You know I
{94}mentioned at our club the disturbances in America, and one of the
company took me up, and said, 'What signifies America, when we are all
in a merry cue?' So they all fell a laughing. Now there's Commons made
Lords, and there's Lords made the Lord knows what; but that's nothing to
us; they make us pay our taxes; they take care of that; ay, ay, ay, they
are sure of that. Pray what have they done for these twenty years last
past?--Why, nothing at all; they have only made a few turnpike roads,
and kept the partridges alive till September; that's all they have done,
for the good of their country. There were some great people formerly,
that lov'd their country, that did every thing for the good of their
country; there were your Alexander the Great--he lov'd his country,
and Julius Caesar lov'd his country, and Charles of Sweedland lov'd his
country, and Queen Semiramis, she lov'd her country more than any of
'em, for she invented solomon-gundy; that's the best eating in the whole
world. Now I'll shew you my plan of operations, Mr. Costive.--We'll
suppose this drop of punch here to be the main ocean, or the sea; very
well. These pieces of cork to be our men of war; very well. Now where
shall I raise my fortifications? I wish I had Mr. Major {95}Moncrieff
here; he's the best in the world at raising a fortification. Oh! I
have it. [_Breaks the pipes._] We'll suppose them to be all the strong
fortified places in the whole world; such as Fort Omoa, Tilbury Fort,
Bergen op Zoom, and Tower Ditch, and all the other fortified places all
over the world. Now I'd have all our horse-cavalry wear cork waistcoats,
and all our foot-infantry should wear air jackets. Then, sir, they'd
cross the sea before you could say Jack Robinson. And where
do you think they should land, Mr. Costive? whisper me that.
Ha!--What?--When?--How?--You don't know.--How should you!--Was you ever
in Germany or Bohemia?--Now, I have; I understands jography. Now they
should land in America, under the line, close to the south pole; there
they should land every mother's babe of 'em. Then there's the Catabaws,
and there's the Catawaws; there's the Cherokees, and there's the ruffs
and rees; they are the four great nations. Then I takes my Catabaws all
across the continent, from Jamaica to Bengal; then they should go to
the Mediterranean. You know where the Mediterranean is?--No, you
know nothing; I'll tell you; the Mediterranean is the metropolis of
Constantinople. Then I'd send a fleet to blockade {96}Paris till the
French king had given up Paul Jones; then I'd send for General
Clinton and Colonel Tarleton; and--Where was I, Mr. Costive; with
Tarleton;--Thank ye--so I was; but you are so dull, Mr Costive, you put
me out. Now I'll explain the whole affair to you; you shan't miss a word
of it. Now there is the king of Prussia and the empress of Russia,
and the nabob of Arcot, and the king of the Hottentots, are all in
the Protestant interest; they make a diversion upon all the Cham
of Tartary's back setlements; then Sir Guy Carleton comes with a
_circumbendibus_, and retakes all the islands, Rhode Island and all; and
takes 'em _here_ and _there_, and _there_ and _here_, and _every where_.
There is the whole affair explained at once to you."

This is the head of a Proud Man: all heads in that predicament are
unsound. This man was rich; and as wealth is a certain hot-bed to raise
flatterers, he had enough of them; they told him he was every thing; he
believed them, and always spoke in the first person, saying, I, I,
I--I will have it so; I know it;--I, I--which puts one in mind of a
school-boy toning out before his mistress's knees, I by itself I. Yet
there is one piece of pride which may be thought excusable; and {97}that
is, that honest exultation of heart which every public performer feels
from the approbation of his auditors; gratefully does he acknowledge
their indulgence, and with sincerity declares that the utmost exertion
of his abilities can never equal the favour of the public.

By way of Epilogue, here are two wigs. [_Takes two wigs._] This is
called the full-buckled bob, and carries a consequentially along with
it: it is worn by those people who frequent city feasts, and gorge
themselves at a Lord-Mayor's-show dinner; and, with one of these wigs
on, their double chins rested upon their breasts, and their shoulders
up, they seem as if they had eaten themselves into a {98}state of
indigestion, or else had bumpered themselves out of breath with bottled
beer. [_Puts on the wig._] "Waiter! bring me a ladleful of soup. You
dog, don't take off that haunch of venison yet!--Bring me the lamb, a
glass of currant jelly, and a clean plate. A hob-nob, sir." "With all
my heart." "Two bumpers of Madeira!--Love, health, and ready rhino, to
all the friends that you and I know."--On the contrary, these lank looks
form the half-famished face. [_Puts on the Methodist hair, and takes the
tub._]

The floor of the world is filthy, the mud of Mammon eats up all your
upper leathers, and we are all become sad soals. Brethren, (the word
brethren comes from the tabernacle, because we {99}all breathe therein),
if you are drowsy I'll rouse you, I'll beat a tattoo upon the parchment
case of your conscience, and I'll whisk the devil like a whirligig among
you. Now let me ask you a question seriously. Did you ever see any body
eat any hasty-pudding? What faces they make when it scalds their mouths!
Phoo, phoo, phoo! What faces will you all make when old Nick nicks you?
Now unto a bowl of punch I compare matrimony; there's the sweet part of
it, which is the honey-moon: then there's the largest part of it, that's
the most insipid, that comes after, and that's the water; then there's
the strong spirits, that's the husband; then there's the sour spirit,
that's the wife. But you don't mind me, no more than a dead horse does
a pair of spectacles; if you did, the sweet words which I utter would be
like a treacle posset to your palates. Do you know how many taylors
make a man?--Why nine. How many half a man?--Why four journeymen and an
apprentice. So have you all been bound 'prentices to madam Faddle, the
fashion-maker; ye have served your times out, and now you set up for
yourselves. My bowels and my small guts groan for you; as the cat on the
house-top is caterwauling, so from the top of my voice will I {100}be
bawling. Put--put some money in the plate, then your abomination shall
be scalded off like bristles from the hog's back, and ye shall be
scalped of them all as easily as I pull off this periwig.

My attempt you have heard to succeed the projector, And I tremblingly
wait your award of this lecture; No merits I plead, but what's fit for
my station, And that is the merit of your approbation. And, since for
mere mirth I exhibit this plan, Condemn, if you please--but excuse, if
you can.

END OF THE LECTURE,




AN ESSAY ON SATIRE.

{101}The vice and folly which overspread human nature first created
the satirist. We should not, therefore, attribute his severity to a
malignity of disposition, but to an exquisite sense of propriety, an
honest indignation of depravity, and a generous desire to reform the
degenerated manners of his fellow-creatures. This has been the cause
of Aristophanes censuring the pedantry and superstition of Socrates;
Horace, Persius, Martial, and Juvenal, the luxury and profligacy of the
Romans; Boileau and Moliere the levity and refinement of the French;
Cervantes the romantic pride and madness of the Spanish; and Dorset,
Gldharn, Swift, Addison, Churchill, Stevens, and Foote, the variety
of vice, folly, and luxury, which we have imported from our extensive
commerce and intercourse with other nations. We should, consequently,
reverse the satirist and correct ourselves.

{102}We should not avoid him as the detecter, but as the friendly
monitor. If he speaks severe truths, we should condemn our own conduct
which gives him the power.

It has frequently been observed, that the satirist has proved more
beneficial to the correction of a state than the divine or legislator.
Indeed he seems to have been created with peculiar penetrative
faculties, and integrity of disposition, and a happy genius to display
the enormity of the features, while it corrects the corrupt exercise
of our vices. The legislator may frame laws sufficiently wise and
judicious, to check and control villany, without the power of impeding
the progress of vice and folly, while they are kept within the limits of
only injuring ourselves. For law has no power to punish us for the vices
which debilitate our constitution, destroy our substance, or degrade our
character.

Nor can religion entirely extirpate vice, no more than she can even
control folly. Her two principles, alluring to virtue by promise of
reward, and dissuading from vice by threats of punishment, extend their
influence no farther than on those whose dispositions are susceptible
of their impressions. So that we find numbers among {103}mankind whose
conduct and opinions are beyond her power. The atheist, who disbelieves
a future existence, is not likely to check the exercise of his favourite
vicious habits for any hope of reward or dread of punishment; and the
debauchee, who, though he may not deny the truth of her tenets, yet is
too much absorbed in his pleasures, to listen to her precepts, or regard
her examples. Besides, there are many so weak in their resolution as
not to be capable of breaking the fetters of habit and prepossession,
although they are, at the same time, sensible of their destructive
consequences. It is, therefore, that nature has implanted in us a sense
which tends to correct our disposition, where law and religion are seen
to have no power. This sense is a desire of public estimation, which not
only tends to give mankind perfection in every art and science, but also
to render our personal character respectable. It is this susceptibility
of shame and infamy which gives satire its efficiency.

Without this sense of ourselves, the scourge would lose its power of
chastisement. We should receive the lashes without a sense of their
pain; and without the sense of their pain we would never amend from this
affliction. From the desire of {104}being approved and noticed,
arises every effort which constitutes the variety of employments and
excellencies the world possesses. It actuates the prince and the beggar,
the peasant and the politician, the labourer and the scholar, the
mechanic and the soldier, the player and the divine. In a word, there
is not an individual in the community whose conduct is not influenced by
its dictates. It is, therefore, not surprising that mankind should be
so impressive to the power of satire, whose object is to describe their
vices and follies, for the finger of public infamy to point at their
deformities and delinquencies. Thus, where law cannot extend its awe
and authority, satire wields the scourge of disgrace; and where religion
cannot convince the atheist, attract the attention of the debauchee, or
reform those who are subject to the power of habit and fashion, satire
affords effectually her assistance. Satire reforms the drunkard, by
exposing to the view of himself and the world the brutality of his
actions and person when under the influence of intoxication. Satire
reforms, likewise, the inordinate actions of those who are not awed by
the belief of future reward and punishment, by exposing them to infamy
during their present {105}existence. And those who are subject to the
dominion of depraved habits satire awakens to a practice of reformation,
from the poignant sense of being the derision and contempt of all their
connexions; for there is no incentive so powerful to abandon pernicious
customs as the sense of present and future disgrace. We may, therefore,
conclude, that nothing tends so much to correct vice and folly as this
species of public censure. Having thus made some observations on the
general utility and necessity of satire, we shall proceed to examine
which of its species is the most likely to be effective.

The most remarkable species of satire are, the narrative, dramatic, and
picturesque; which have also their separate species peculiar to each.
The narrative contains those that either reprove with a smile or a
frown, by pourtraying the characteristics of an individual, or the
general manners of a society, people, or nation; and are either
described in verse or prose. The dramatic contains perfect resemblance,
which is described by comedy; or caricature, which is described by
farce. And the picturesque is what exercises the painter, engraver,
and sculptor. In all these species the satirist may either divert by
his humour, entertain by his wit, or torture by his severity. Each mode
{106}has its advocates. But we think that the mode should be adapted to
the nature of the vice or folly which demands correction. If the vice be
of an atrocious nature, it certainly requires that the satire be severe.
If it be of a nature that arises more from a weakness of mind than
depravity of feeling, we think it should be chastised by the lively
and pointed sarcasms of wit; and, if the failing be merely a folly,
it should only be the subject of humorous ridicule. With respect
to determining which species of satire is the most preferable, the
narrative of Horace and Juvenal, the dramatic of Aristophanes and Foote,
or the picturesque of Hogarth and Stevens; we can best form our
opinion from comparing their different defects and excellencies. As
the narrative is merely a description of manners, it is devoid of that
imitation of passion and character which gives effect to the dramatic.
But, as the language is more pointed, more energetic, and more elegant,
it certainly must impress the reader more deeply. The dramatic,
therefore, while it is calculated to affect more the spectator, is
inferior to the narrative in the closet. The picturesque is more
defective than either of the two former. It has only power to describe
the action of an instant, and {107}this without the assistance of
reflection, observation, and sentiment, which they derive from their
verbal expression.

We may, consequently, perceive that each species has defects to which
others are not liable, and excellencies which the others do not possess.

Thus it is evident that a species of satire, which could blend all the
advantages of all the three, can only be that which is adequate to the
idea of perfect satire. This kind of satire is the Lecture on Heads.
We cannot, therefore, be surprised that it should have been the most
popular exhibition of the age. The heads and their dresses composed the
picturesque: the assumption of character and dialogue by the lecturer,
composed the dramatic; and the lively description of manners, the
judicious propriety and pertinence of observation, composed the
narrative. Thus did the genius of its author invent a species of
entertainment which possessed excellencies that counterbalanced the
defects of all other satirists, produced from the age of Aristophanes,
who flourished four hundred and seven years before the Christian era,
until his own time.

Having thus enforced the utility of satire in general, and specified the
defects and properties of {108}its particular kinds, we shall proceed to
make a few observations on the peculiar merit of the Lecture on Heads.
We have already seen that it possesses every quality of all other
satires in itself: it only, therefore, remains to consider its wit,
humour, character, and apparatus; which are its essensial properties.
The wit of this Lecture is as various as the subjects which it
satirises. Its brilliancy charms, its poignancy convicts while it
chastises, and its pertinency always adorns the sentiment or observation
it would illustrate. The variety of its species always entertains, but
never satiates. Even puns please, from the aptness and pleasantry of
their conceits. His wit is so predominant, that, if we may be allowed
the expression, it is discovered in his silence. A most striking example
of this is where he uses the rhetorical figure called the Aposiopesis,
or suppression, in displaying the head of a prostitute: he introduces
it with saying, "This is the head of a woman of the town, or a ------;
but, whatever other title the lady may have, we are not entitled here to
take notice of it." Nothing can be more delicate than this suppression:
it displays a tenderness and liberality to the frailty of female nature,
which does as much credit to his feelings as to his genius.

{109}We know not a more happy instance of giving expression to silence,
or giving an idea without verbal assistance, than is contained in the
above character.

The humour of this Lecture is grotesque, lively, and delicate; it
varies its form with the character it ridicules. Nothing can surpass the
humorous whimsicality of his situations and expressions; for they please
as much from the fanciful manner in which he places the ridiculous to
our view, as from the resemblance with which he so naturally describes
the prototype. His description of a London Blood cannot fail to excite
laughter in the features of the greatest cynic. The natural propensity
which mankind has to laugh at mischief never was more happily gratified
than from his describing this character _pushing a blind horse into a
china-shop_. Had he chosen any other animal, the effect would not have
been so great on his audience. If it had been an ass, it would have
been attended with an idea of the obstinacy and the reluctance of this
animal, which would have suggested its being too difficult; it would
not, therefore, have excited, in any manner, the risible faculty. Had
it been an ox, it would have {110}connected with it the idea of too much
fury and devastation to entertain with the picture. But choosing a blind
horse, who, from his loss of sight and natural docility, may be
easily supposed to be led into such a situation; the mind adopts the
credibility, and enjoys the whimsical and mischievous consequence, while
it condemns the folly and puerility of the Blood who occasioned it.
It is this peculiar faculty of choice of subjects, situation, and
assemblage, which constitutes the excellence of a humorist, which
Stevens possessed in a most eminent degree; for he displays it in almost
every line of his Lecture. Indeed, in this art we know of none superior
to him, except it be Shakespeare in some of his comedies, which are
inimitable in every thing which relates to the _vis comica_. With
respect to the characters of this Lecture, they are such as will be
found to exist with human nature; except a few, who are described as
the devotees to particular fashions; and such will always be found while
vanity, luxury, and dissipation, exist in society. Therefore, from this
universality of character, his Lecture will ever be worthy the
perusal of every person who would wish to avoid being contemptible or
ridiculous: for {111}there is no person but may be liable to some vice
or folly, which he will find exposed by this masterly, pleasant, and
original, satirist.

His characters compose every part of the community. The old and young,
rich and poor, male and female, married and unmarried, and those
of every learned and unlearned profession, are the subjects of his
whimsical, yet judicious and pertinent, censure.

Having thus made some general remarks on the wit, humour, and character,
of this Lecture, it only remains for us to say a few words on its
apparatus. This was merely the picturesque part of the satire, which
gave that effect to the _tout ensemble_, which it would not otherwise
have produced as a representation. It was by this appendage that Mr.
Stevens was enabled to afford entertainment for nearly three hours
without a change of person, although he changed his appearance. The
apparatus was not only an ornament, but a visible illustration of what
would otherwise have been only mental. It was, therefore, indispensable
as a stage exhibition; for, to entertain an audience, the sight must be
exercised as well as the mind. It is necessary to prevent languor, which
will always be the consequence where reflection is {112}more exerted
than sensation. Thus, in every public exhibition, the senses of hearing
and seeing should be gratified in every manner that is consistent with
the nature of what is produced for the observation of the mind. But
although this apparatus was necessary as a representation, it may be
dispensed with as a closet satire: for, not being confined to read two
or three hours, we can shut the book whenever it becomes uninteresting,
which we cannot at a public lecture. We are then confined to one place
and one object during its performance. It is this which renders every
lecture, that is not accompanied by some apparatus, so tiresome to the
auditor. We, therefore, read such lectures as are upon literary Subjects
with more pleasure than we hear them delivered. But lectures on anatomy,
experimental philosophy, astronomy, and every other that admits of
apparatus, we hear and see with much more pleasure and improvement than
when we read them. In regard to the Lecture on Heads, as the apparatus
is not necessary to make the reader comprehend the force and meaning of
the satire more than he can from the words themselves, we make no doubt
but its perusal will afford such pleasure as to increase its estimation,
if possible, {113}with the public. From a more close attention they will
discover beauties of wit, humour, character, and imitation, that were
not perceived during its representation: for the minds of an audience
are very susceptible of being diverted from attending to what is
represented before them.

The company whom they are with, or the attractions of others whom they
see among an audience, frequently suspend the attention while it loses
the greatest beauties of the performance. But, when we are reading a
performance in our closet, whatever is capable of pleasing from its
novelty, propriety, or excellence, is not liable to be lost from any
obstruction or interference by other objects.

Consciousness, therefore, of the entertainment this Lecture will afford
to the reader, as well as the auditor and spectator, is the chief
inducement of submitting it thus, in its only original state, for his
approbation.
